THE  
EYES  
OF
THE  
SKIN
ARCHITECTURE  
AND THE SENSES
FOURTH EDITION
JUHANI PALLASMAA
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

This edition first published 2024
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
Edition History: John Wiley & Sons Ltd (3e, 2012)
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, 
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or 
otherwise, except as permitted by law. Advice on how to obtain permission to reuse material from 
this title is available at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
The right of Juhani Pallasmaa to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in 
accordance with law.
Registered Offices
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, customer services, and more information about Wiley 
products visit us at www.wiley.com.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some 
content that appears in standard print versions of this book may not be available in other formats.
Trademarks: Wiley and the Wiley logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United States and other countries and may not be used without written 
permission. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty
While the publisher and authors have used their best efforts in preparing this work, they make no 
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this 
work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of 
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales 
representatives, written sales materials or promotional statements for this work. This work is sold with 
the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. The advice 
and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a 
specialist where appropriate. The fact that an organization, website, or product is referred to in this 
work as a citation and/or potential source of further information does not mean that the publisher 
and authors endorse the information or services the organization, website, or product may provide or 
recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that websites listed in this work may 
have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read. Neither the 
publisher nor authors shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including 
but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Pallasmaa, Juhani, author.
Title: The eyes of the skin : architecture and the senses / Juhani
   Pallasmaa.
Description: Fourth edition. | Hoboken, NJ : Wiley, 2024. | Includes index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2023034968 (print) | LCCN 2023034969 (ebook) | ISBN
   9781394200672 (cloth) | ISBN 9781394200696 (adobe pdf) | ISBN
   9781394200689 (epub)
Subjects: LCSH: Architecture—Philosophy. | Senses and sensation in
   architecture.
Classification: LCC NA2500 .P35 2024 (print) | LCC NA2500 (ebook) | DDC
   720.1—dc23/eng/20231206
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023034968
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023034969
Cover Design and Image: Wiley
Set in 9/11.5pt Bembo Std by Straive, Chennai, India
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

CONTENTS
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FOREWORD
vi
INTRODUCTION	
Touching the World
  
by Juhani Pallasmaa
2
PART ONE	
Vision and Knowledge
10
Critics of Ocularcentrism
14
The Narcissistic and Nihilistic Eye
16
Oral Versus Visual Space
17
Retinal Architecture and the Loss of Plasticity
20
An Architecture of Visual Images
24
Materiality and Time
25
The Rejection of Alberti’s Window
28
A New Vision and Sensory Balance
30
PART TWO	
The Body in the Centre
33
Multi-­Sensory Experience
34
The Significance of the Shadow
39
Acoustic Intimacy
42
Silence, Time and Solitude
43
Spaces of Scent
46
The Shape of Touch
48
The Taste of Stone
50
Images of Muscle and Bone
51
Images of Action
54
Bodily Identification
55
Mimesis of the Body
56
Spaces of Memory and Imagination
60
An Architecture of the Senses
61
The Task of Architecture
62
A DOOR HANDLE,  
A HANDSHAKE	
An introduction to Juhani Pallasmaa and his work  
	
	
by Peter MacKeith
64
Apertures
72
Poetics
81
NOTES
88
INDEX
99
PICTURE CREDITS
103
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

THIN 
ICE 
STEVEN 
HOLL
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

vii
Foreword
When I sat down to write these notes in rainy New York City, thinking of the 
fresh white snow which had just fallen in Helsinki and the early thin ice, 
I  remembered stories of Finland’s cold winter, where every year short-­cut 
roads are improvised across the thickly frozen north lakes. Months later as the 
ice begins to thin, someone will take the gamble to drive across the lake and 
crash through. I imagine the last look out over white ice cracks spread by cold 
black water rising up inside the sinking car. Finland’s is a tragic and mysterious 
beauty.
Juhani Pallasmaa and I first began to share thoughts about the 
phenomenology of architecture during my first visit to Finland for the 5th 
Alvar Aalto Symposium in Jyväskylä in August 1991.
In October 1992, we met again in Helsinki when I was there to work on 
the competition for the Museum of Contemporary Art. I remember a 
conversation about Maurice Merleau-­Ponty’s writings as they might be 
interpreted or directed towards spatial sequence, texture, material and light, 
experienced in architecture. I recall this conversation took place over lunch 
below decks in a huge wooden boat anchored in the Helsinki harbour. The 
steam rose in curls above the vegetable soup as the boat rocked slightly in 
the  partially frozen harbour. I have experienced the architecture of Juhani 
Pallasmaa, from his wonderful museum additions at Rovaniemi to his wooden 
summerhouse on a remarkable little stone island in the Turku Archipelago in 
southwestern Finland. The way spaces feel, the sound and smell of these places, 
has equal weight to the way things look. Pallasmaa is not just a theoretician; he 
is a brilliant architect of phenomenological insight. He practises the unanalysable 
architecture of the senses whose phenomenal properties concretise his writings 
towards a philosophy of architecture.
In 1993, following an invitation from Toshio Nakamura, we worked 
together with Alberto Pérez-­Gómez to produce the book Questions of Perception: 
Phenomenology of Architecture.1 Several years later the publishers, A+U, chose to 
republish this little book, finding its arguments proved important to other 
architects.
Juhani Pallasmaa’s The Eyes of the Skin, which grew out of Questions of 
Perception, is a tighter, clearer argument for the crucial phenomenological 
dimensions of human experience in architecture. Not since the Danish 
architect Steen Eiler Rasmussen’s Experiencing Architecture (1959) has there been 
such a succinct and clear text which could serve students and architects at this 
critical time in the development of 21st-­century architecture.2
Merleau-­Ponty’s The Visible and the Invisible, the book he was writing 
when he died, contains an astonishing chapter: ‘The Intertwining  – The 
Chiasm’. (It was, in fact, the source of the name I gave my 1992 competition 
entry for the Museum of Contemporary Art in Helsinki  – Chiasm was 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

viii
changed to Kiasma, there being no ‘C’ in Finnish.) In the chapter’s text on the 
‘Horizon of Things’, Merleau-­Ponty wrote: ‘No more than are the sky or the 
earth is the horizon a collection of things held together, or a class name, or a 
logical possibility of conception, or a system of “potentiality of consciousness”: 
it is a new type of being, a being by porosity, pregnancy, or generality . . .’.3
In the second decade of the 21st century, these thoughts go beyond 
the  horizon and ‘beneath the skin’. Throughout our world, consumer 
goods propelled by hyperbolic advertising techniques serve to supplant our 
consciousness and diffuse our reflective capacity. In architecture, the application 
of new, digitally supercharged techniques currently joins the hyperbole. With 
this noisy background, the work of Pallasmaa evokes reflective solitude and 
resolve – what he has once called ‘The Architecture of Silence’. I will urge my 
students to read this work and reflect on ‘background noise’. Today, the ‘depth 
of our being’ stands on thin ice.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the Senses, Fourth Edition. Juhani Pallasmaa.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
TOUCHING 
THE 
WORLD
JUHANI 
PALLASMAA
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

3
Introduction
My little book The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the Senses was first published 
in 1996 in the ‘Polemics’ series of Academy Editions, London. The editors of 
the series invited me to write an extended essay of 32 pages on a subject matter 
that I found pertinent in the architectural discourse of the time.
The second part of the manuscript took its basic ideas from an essay entitled 
‘An Architecture of the Seven Senses’, published in the July 1994 special edition 
of A+U entitled Questions of Perception, a publication on Steven Holl’s architectural 
work, which also included essays by Holl himself and Alberto Pérez-­Gómez. A 
somewhat later lecture of mine given in a seminar on architectural phenomenology 
at the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts in Copenhagen in June 1995, where 
the three writers of Questions of Perception presented lectures, provided the basic 
arguments and references for the first part of this book.
Somewhat to my surprise, the humble book was received very positively, 
and it became required reading in architectural theory courses in numerous 
schools of architecture around the world.
The polemical essay was initially based on my personal experiences, views 
and speculations. I had simply become increasingly concerned about the 
dominance of vision and the suppression of other senses in the way architecture 
was taught, conceived and critiqued, and the consequent disappearance of 
sensory and sensual qualities from architecture.
As this new edition was first discussed between the publisher and myself, 
I was hesitant to expand my text of the original edition, as I consider the 
original edition a historical document, which is grounded in the understanding 
and thinking of the senses at the time the book was written, more than a 
quarter of a century ago. However, I agreed to make minor corrections and 
clarifications, which do not alter the original arguments, but make them easier 
to understand. The additions also intentionally expand the original arguments 
beyond the senses to the existential sphere of architecture.
During the years since I wrote the book, interest in the significance of the 
senses, both philosophically and in terms of experiencing, teaching and making 
architecture, has grown significantly. My assumptions about the role of the 
body as the locus of perception, thought and consciousness, as well as about the 
significance of the senses in articulating, storing and processing sensory 
responses and thoughts, have been strengthened and confirmed by other 
writers. In particular, philosophical investigations on human embodiment, 
experience and atmospheres, as well as recent neurological research on the 
senses, have provided support for my assumptions.
In the 28 years since the first publication of the book, my thinking has 
deepened and widened. For instance, I have understood the significance of 
atmospheres in our multisensory experiences and evaluations of environments 
and architecture.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

4
With the choice of the title ‘The Eyes of the Skin’, I wished to express the 
significance of the tactile sense for our experience and understanding of 
the world, but I also intended to create a conceptual short circuit between the 
dominant sense of vision and the suppressed sense modality of touch. Later, in a 
conversation with the American light artist, James Turrell, I learned that our skin 
is capable of distinguishing a number of colours; we actually do see by our skin.1
The significance of the tactile sense in human life has become increasingly 
evident. The view of Ashley Montagu, the anthropologist, based on medical 
evidence, confirms the primacy of the haptic realm:
[The skin] is the oldest and the most sensitive of our organs, our first medium of 
communication, and our most efficient protector [. . .] Even the transparent cornea 
of the eye is overlain by a layer of modified skin [. . .] Touch is the parent of our 
eyes, ears, nose, and mouth. It is the sense which became differentiated into the 
others, a fact that seems to be recognized in the age-­old evaluation of touch as 
‘the mother of the senses’.2
Touch is the sensory mode which integrates our experiences of the world 
and of ourselves. Even visual perceptions are fused and integrated into the 
haptic continuum of the self; my body remembers who I am and how I am 
located in the world. My body is truly the navel of my world, not in the sense 
of the viewing point of the central perspective, but as the very locus of 
reference, memory, imagination and integration. All the senses, including 
vision, are, in a way, extensions of the tactile sense; the senses are specialisations 
of skin tissue, and all sensory experiences are modes of touching, and thus 
related to tactility. Our contact with the world takes place at the boundary line 
of the self through specialised parts of our enveloping membrane. We humans, 
just as all animals, are extending ourselves into the world through our actions 
as well as material and mental constructions. As representatives of Homo 
sapience, our image of self does not stop at the skin, as we relate and extend 
ourselves in countless ways by means of mobility, technology, materials, culture 
and beliefs, both scientific and religious.
It is evident that ‘life-­enhancing’3 architecture has to address all the senses 
simultaneously, and help to fuse our image of self with our experience of the 
world. Architecture is fundamentally a relational art; it relates us with both 
the  intimacies and immensities of the world. The essential mental task of 
buildings is relational accommodation and integration. They project our 
human measures and sense of order into the measureless and meaningless 
natural space. Architecture does not make us inhabit worlds of mere fabrication 
and fantasy; it articulates the experience of our being-­in-­the-­world and 
strengthens our sense of reality and self. Most importantly, it projects 
experiential meaning to our existence in the world.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

5
The sense of self, strengthened by art and architecture, also permits us to 
engage fully in the mental dimensions of dream, imagination and desire. 
Buildings and cities provide the horizon for the understanding and confronting 
of the human existential condition. Instead of creating mere objects of visual 
seduction, architecture relates, mediates and projects meanings. The ultimate 
meaning of any building is beyond architecture; it directs our consciousness 
back to the world and towards our own sense of self and being. Profound 
architecture makes us experience ourselves as complete, embodied and spiritual 
beings. In fact, this is the great function of all meaningful art.
In the experience of art, a peculiar exchange takes place; I lend my 
emotions and associations to the place, and the place lends me its atmosphere, 
which entices and emancipates my perceptions and thoughts. An architectural 
work is not experienced as a series of isolated retinal pictures, but in its full and 
integrated material, embodied and spiritual essence. It offers pleasurable shapes 
and surfaces moulded for the touch of the eye and the other senses, but it also 
incorporates and integrates physical and mental structures, giving our existential 
experience a strengthened coherence and significance.
In creative work, the artist, craftsman and architect are directly engaged 
with their bodies and their existential experiences rather than focusing on an 
external and objectified problem. True artistic works are always relational 
entities, fusing and integrating our external and internal worlds, our bodily 
experiences and mental imageries. The message and value of a piece of 
sculpture or an architectural structure is not in its material existence, but in the 
poetic experiences and emotions that it mediates of our life world and 
its meanings.
A wise architect, also, works with his/her entire body and sense of self. 
While working on a building or an object, the architect is simultaneously 
engaged in a reverse perspective, his/her self-­image, or more precisely, 
existential experience. In creative work, a powerful identification and 
projection takes place; the entire bodily and mental constitution of the 
maker becomes the site of the work. Ludwig Wittgenstein acknowledges 
the interaction of both philosophical and architectural work with the 
image of self: ‘Working in philosophy – like work in architecture in many 
respects – is really more a work on oneself. On one’s own interpretation. 
On how one sees things [. . .]’.4
The computer is usually seen as a solely beneficial invention, which 
liberates human fantasy. I wish to express my serious concern in this respect, at 
least considering the current role of the computer in education and the design 
process. Computer imaging tends to flatten our magnificent, multisensory, 
simultaneous and synchronic capacities of imagination by turning the design 
process into a passive visual manipulation, a retinal journey. Design is not 
merely a rational, technical and performative task; architecture relates us to the 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

6
course and depth of culture and makes our existence understandable. 
Architecture helps us give human existence its human as well as metaphysical 
meaning; we do not dwell only in space, place and time; we also dwell in 
hidden myths and spirit. Existence and life are not abstractions, and the task of 
the art of building is to clarify and relate human existence and give it meanings 
that exceed the mundane.
The computer creates a distance between the maker and the object, 
whereas drawing by hand as well as working with models put the designer in 
a haptic contact with the object, or space. When drawing, we touch the object 
and hold it in our hands. In our imagination, the object is simultaneously held 
in the hand and inside the head, and the imagined and projected physical 
image is modelled by our embodied imagination. We are inside and outside of 
the conceived object at the same time. Creative work calls for a bodily and 
mental identification, empathy and compassion. Recent research on mirror 
neurons provides an experimental basis for the understanding of the complex 
processes of embodied simulation.5
Existence and life are not abstractions, and the task of the art of building 
is to clarify and relate human existence and give it meanings that exceed 
the mundane.
We tend to think of the sense of vision only as the focused vision. 
However, the role of peripheral and unfocused vision in our lived experience 
of the world, as well as in our experience of interiority in the spaces we inhabit, 
has evoked my interest. A remarkable factor in the experience of enveloping 
spatiality, interiority and hapticity is the deliberate suppression of sharp, focused 
vision. This issue has hardly entered the theoretical discourse of architecture as 
architectural theorising continues to be interested in focused vision, pure and 
clear form, conscious intentionality and perspectival representation. The very 
essence of the lived experience is moulded by unconscious haptic imagery and 
unfocused peripheral vision. Focused vision confronts us with the world, 
whereas peripheral vision envelops us in ‘the flesh of the world’, to use an 
expression of Merleau-­Ponty. Alongside the critique of the hegemony of 
vision, we need to reconsider the very essence of sight itself and the essential 
collaboration of the various sensory realms.
Photographed architectural images are centralised images of focused 
Gestalt. Yet, the quality of an architectural reality seems to depend fundamentally 
on peripheral vision, which enfolds the subject in the space. A forest context 
and richly moulded architectural spaces provide ample stimuli for peripheral 
vision, and these settings centre us in the very place, both material and 
experiential. The preconscious perceptual realm, which is experienced outside 
the sphere of focused vision, seems to be more important existentially than the 
focused image. In fact, there is medical evidence that peripheral vision has a 
higher priority in our perceptual and mental system.6
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

7
These observations suggest that one of the reasons why the architectural 
and urban settings of our time tend to make us outsiders, in comparison with 
the forceful emotional engagement of natural and historical settings, is their 
poverty of the field of peripheral vision. Unconscious peripheral perception 
transforms retinal Gestalt into spatial and bodily experiences. Peripheral vision 
integrates us with space, while focused vision pushes us out of the space, 
making us mere spectators.
Architectural theorising, education and practices have primarily been 
concerned with form. Yet, we have an astonishing capacity to perceive and grasp 
unconsciously and peripherally complex environmental entities and atmospheres. 
Atmospheric characteristics of spaces, places and settings are grasped before any 
conscious observation of details is made. Despite the obvious importance of 
atmospheric perception, it has hardly been introduced in architectural discourse. 
Again, neurological investigations suggest that our processes of perception and 
cognition advance from the instantaneous grasp of entities towards the 
identification of details, rather than the other way round.
Since writing The Eyes of the Skin 28 years ago, I have expanded my critical 
analysis of the neglect of the embodied essence of perception, cognition and 
consciousness in two later books also published by John Wiley & Sons: The 
Thinking Hand: Existential and Embodied Wisdom in Architecture (Chichester, 2009) 
and The Embodied Image: Imagination and Imagery in Architecture (Chichester, 
2011). My next book Rootedness: reflections for young architects, currently in the 
editorial process at Wiley, is more deeply engaged in the existential issues of 
architecture, as well as of studying and practising this significant craft.
(Introduction revised, Enäjärvi Lake, Finland, June–July 2023)
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the Senses, Fourth Edition. Juhani Pallasmaa.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
PART 
ONE
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

9
‘The hands want to see, the eyes want to caress’.
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe1
‘The dancer has his ear in his toes’.
Friedrich Nietzsche2
‘If the body had been easier to understand, nobody would 
have thought that we had a mind’.
Richard Rorty3
‘The taste of the apple [. . .] lies in the contact of the fruit 
with the palate, not in the fruit itself; in a similar way 
[. . .] poetry lies in the meeting of poem and reader, not 
in the lines of symbols printed on the pages of a book. 
What is essential is the aesthetic act, the thrill, the almost 
physical emotion that comes with each reading’.
Jorge Luis Borges4
‘How would the painter or poet express anything other 
than his encounter with the world?’
Maurice Merleau-­Ponty5
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

10
Vision and Knowledge
In Western culture, sight has historically been regarded as the most important 
and noble of the senses, and thinking and understanding are thought of in 
terms of seeing. Already in classical Greek thought, certainty was based on 
vision and visibility. ‘The eyes are more exact witnesses than the ears’, wrote 
Heraclitus in one of his fragments.6 Plato regarded vision as humanity’s greatest 
gift,7 and he insisted that ethical universals must be accessible to ‘the mind’s 
eye’.8 Aristotle, likewise, considered sight as the most noble of the senses 
‘because it approximates the intellect most closely by virtue of the relative 
immateriality of its knowing’.9
Since the Greeks, philosophical writings of all times have abounded with 
ocular metaphors to the point that knowledge has become analogous with 
clear vision, and light is regarded as the metaphor for truth. Aquinas even 
applies the notion of sight to other sensory realms as well as to intellectual 
cognition.
The impact of the sense of vision on philosophy is well summed up by 
Peter Sloterdijk: ‘The eyes are the organic prototype of philosophy. Their 
enigma is that they not only can see but are also able to see themselves seeing. 
This gives them a prominence among the body’s cognitive organs. A good part 
of philosophical thinking is actually only eye reflex, eye dialectic, seeing-­
oneself-­see’.10 During the Renaissance, the five senses were understood to 
form a hierarchical system from the highest sense of vision down to touch; this 
had already been the hierarchy of the senses in Aristotle’s thinking. The 
Renaissance system of the senses was related to the image of the cosmic body; 
vision was correlated to fire and light, hearing to air, smell to vapour, taste to 
water and touch to earth.11
The invention of perspectival representation by architect Philippo 
Brunellesci made the eye the centre point of the perceptual world as well 
as of the concept of the self. Perspectival representation itself turned into 
a  symbolic form, one which not only describes but also conditions 
perception.
There is no doubt that our technological culture has ordered and 
separated the senses even more distinctly. Vision and hearing are now the 
privileged sociable senses, whereas the other three are considered as archaic 
sensory remnants with a merely private function, and they are usually 
suppressed by the code of culture. Only sensations such as the olfactory 
enjoyment of a meal, fragrance of flowers and responses to temperature are 
allowed to draw collective awareness in our ocularcentric and obsessively 
hygienic code of culture.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

11
The dominance of vision over the other senses – and the consequent bias 
in cognition  – has been observed by many philosophers. A collection of 
philosophical essays entitled Modernity and the Hegemony of Vision, edited by 
David Michael Lewin, argues that ‘beginning with the ancient Greeks, Western 
culture has been dominated by an ocularcentric paradigm, a vision-­generated, 
vision-­centred interpretation of knowledge, truth, and reality’.12 This thought-­
provoking book analyses ‘historical connections between vision and knowledge, 
vision and ontology, vision and power, vision and ethics’.13
As the ocularcentric paradigm of our relation to the world and of our 
concept of knowledge – the epistemological privileging of vision – has 
been revealed by philosophers, it is also important to survey critically the 
role of vision in relation to the other senses in our understanding and 
practice of the art of architecture. Architecture, as with all art, is 
fundamentally confronted with questions of human existence in space and 
time; it expresses and relates man’s being in the world. Architecture is 
deeply engaged in the metaphysical questions of the self and the world, 
interiority and exteriority, time and duration and life and death. ‘Aesthetic 
and cultural practices are peculiarly susceptible to the changing experience 
of space and time precisely because they entail the construction of spatial 
representations and artefacts out of the flow of human experience’, writes 
David Harvey.14 Architecture is our primary instrument for relating us with 
space and time and giving these dimensions a human measure and meaning. 
It domesticates limitless and shapeless space and endless time to be 
experienced, inhabited and understood by humankind. Architecture turns 
nameless and meaningless physical space into experiential and habitable 
places, the human domicile. We do not live in abstract space; we exist in 
nameable places and related situations. We become part of the place, and it 
becomes part of us, while space is doomed to remain as a conceptual 
abstraction. As a consequence of this interdependence of place, space and 
time, the dialectics of external and internal space, physical and spiritual, 
material and mental and unconscious and conscious priorities concerning 
the senses as well as their relative roles and interactions, have an essential 
impact on the nature of the arts and architecture. Architecture is 
fundamentally an art of relatedness.
David Michael Levin motivates the philosophical critique of the dominance 
of the eye with the following words: ‘I think it is appropriate to challenge the 
hegemony of vision – the ocularcentrism of our culture. And I think we need to 
examine very critically the character of vision that predominates today in 
our world.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

12
1
2
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

13
We urgently need a diagnosis of the psychosocial pathologies of everyday 
seeing – and a critical understanding of ourselves, as visionary beings’.15 It is 
also essential to understand how we have been and increasingly are extending 
our senses through technological devices and, on the other hand, how these 
technological extensions alter our natural senses developed by processes of 
timeless evolution. Our technological inventions also change our ways of 
thinking, understanding and feeling, and these changes even have ethical 
consequences.
Levin points out the autonomy drive and aggressiveness of vision, and ‘the 
specters of patriarchal rule’ that haunt our ocularcentric culture:
The will to power is very strong in vision. There is a very strong tendency in vision 
to grasp and fixate, to reify and totalise: a tendency to dominate, secure, and control, 
which eventually, because it was so extensively promoted, assumed a certain uncon-
tested hegemony over our culture and its philosophical discourse, establishing, in 
keeping with the instrumental rationality of our culture and the technological 
character of our society, an ocularcentric metaphysics of presence.16
I believe that many aspects of the pathology of everyday architecture 
today can likewise be understood through an analysis of the epistemology of 
the senses and a critique of the ocular bias of our culture at large, and of 
architecture in particular. The inhumanity of contemporary architecture and 
cities can be understood as the consequence of the neglect of the body and the 
OCULARCENTRISM AND THE  
VIOLATION OF THE EYE
1	 Architecture has been regarded  
as an art form of the eye.
	 Eye Reflecting the Interior of the  
Theatre of Besançon (detail),  
engraving after Claude-­Nicolas  
Ledoux. The theatre was built  
from 1775 to 1784.
2	 Vision is regarded as the most  
noble of the senses, and the  
loss of eyesight as the ultimate  
physical loss.
	 Luis Buñuel and Salvador Dalí,  
Un Chien Andalou (Andalusian  
Dog), 1929. The shocking scene  
in which the heroine’s eye is  
sliced with a razor blade.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

14
senses and an imbalance in our sensory and value system. The growing 
experiences of alienation, detachment and solitude in the technological world 
today, for instance, may be related to a certain obsessive orientation in today’s 
technologies. It is thought-­provoking that this sense of estrangement and 
detachment is often evoked most clearly by the technologically most advanced 
settings, such as hospitals and airports. The dominance of the eye and the 
suppression of the other senses tend to push us into detachment, isolation and 
outsideness. The art of the eye has certainly produced imposing, thought-­
provoking and poetic structures and images, but it has not facilitated human 
rootedness in the world. The fact that the Modernist idiom has not generally 
been able to penetrate the surface of popular taste and values seems to be due 
to its one-­sided intellectual and visual emphasis; Modernist design at large has 
housed the intellect and the eye, but it has left the body and the other senses, 
as well as our memories, imagination and dreams, homeless.
Critics of Ocularcentrism
The ocularcentric tradition and the consequent spectator theory of knowledge 
in Western thinking already had their critics among philosophers before today’s 
concerns. René Descartes, for instance, regarded vision as the most universal 
and noble of the senses, and his objectifying philosophy is consequently 
grounded in the privileging of vision. However, he also equated vision with 
touch, a sense which he considered to be ‘more certain and less vulnerable to 
error than vision’.17
Friedrich Nietzsche attempted to subvert the authority of ocular thinking 
in seeming contradiction with the general line of his thought. He criticised the 
‘eye outside of time and history’18 presumed by many philosophers. He even 
accused philosophers of a ‘treacherous and blind hostility towards the senses’.19 
Max Scheler bluntly calls this attitude the ‘hatred of the body’.20
The forcefully critical ‘anti-­ocularcentric’ view of Western ocularcentric 
perception and thinking, which developed in the 20th-­century French 
intellectual tradition, is thoroughly surveyed by Martin Jay in his book 
Downcast Eyes: The Denigration of Vision in Twentieth-­Century French Thought.21 
The writer traces the development of the modern vision-­centred culture 
through such diverse fields as the invention of the printing press, artificial 
illumination, photography, visual poetry and the new experience of time. On 
the other hand, he analyses the anti-­ocular positions of many of the seminal 
French writers, such as Henri Bergson, Georges Bataille, Jean-­Paul Sartre, 
Maurice Merleau-­Ponty, Jacques Lacan, Louis Althusser, Guy Debord, Roland 
Barthes, Jacques Derrida, Luce Irigaray, Emmanuel Levinas and Jean-­
François Lyotard.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

15
Sartre was outspokenly hostile to the sense of vision to the point of 
ocularphobia; his oeuvre has been estimated to contain 7000 references to 
‘the look’.22 He was concerned with ‘the objectifying look of the other, and 
the “medusa glance” [which] “petrifies” everything that it comes in contact 
with’.23 In his view, space has taken over time in human consciousness as a 
consequence of ocularcentrism.24 This change is also clear in the development 
of Western literature, which was dominated by the dimension of time, but 
became engaged primarily in issues of space around the beginning of the 
20th century. This reversal of the relative significance accorded to the 
notions of space and time has important repercussions on our understanding 
of physical and historical processes. The prevailing concepts of space and 
time and their interrelations form an essential paradigm for architecture, as 
Sigfried Giedion established in his seminal ideological history of modern 
architecture, Space, Time and Architecture.25 Giedion quotes the mathematician 
Hermann Minkowsky’s credo: ‘Henceforth, space alone or time alone is 
doomed to fade into a mere shadow: only a kind of union of both will 
preserve their existence’.26 This view surely applies in physics, but not in the 
experiential art of architecture, which is grounded in our sensory, mental 
and experiential realities. Simply, architecture is not a scientific practise, it is 
an art of human existential mediation, which includes numerous aspects 
of science.
Maurice Merleau-­Ponty launched a ceaseless critique of the ‘Cartesian 
perspectivalist scopic regime’ and ‘its privileging of an ahistorical, 
disinterested, disembodied subject entirely outside of the world’.27 His 
entire philosophical work focuses on perception in general, and vision in 
particular. But instead of the Cartesian eye of the outside spectator, Merleau-­
Ponty’s sense of sight is an embodied vision that is an incarnate part of the 
‘flesh of the world’:28 ‘Our body is both an object among objects and that 
which sees and touches them’.29 The philosopher saw an osmotic relation 
between the self and the world – they interpenetrate and mutually define 
each other  – and he emphasised the simultaneity and interaction of the 
senses. ‘My perception is [therefore] not a sum of visual, tactile and audible 
givens: I perceive in a total way with my whole being: I grasp a unique 
structure of the thing, a unique way of being, which speaks to all my senses 
at once’, he writes.30
Martin Heidegger, Michel Foucault and Jacques Derrida have all argued 
that the thought and culture of modernity have not only continued the 
historical privileging of sight but furthered its negative tendencies. Each, in 
their own separate ways, has regarded the sight-­dominance of the modern era 
as distinctly different from that of earlier times. The hegemony of vision has 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

16
been reinforced in our time by a multitude of technological inventions and the 
endless multiplication and production of images  – ‘an unending rainfall of 
images’, as Italo Calvino calls it.31 ‘The fundamental event of the modern age 
is the conquest of the world as picture’, writes Heidegger.32 The philosopher’s 
speculation has certainly materialised in our age of the fabricated, mass-­
produced and manipulated image.
The technologically expanded and strengthened eye today penetrates 
deep into matter and space and enables man to cast a simultaneous look on 
the opposite sides of the globe. The experiences of space and time have 
become fused into each other by speed (David Harvey uses the notion of 
‘time–space compression’33), and as a consequence, we are witnessing a 
distinct reversal of the two dimensions – a temporalisation of space and a 
spatialisation of time. The only sense that is fast enough to keep pace with 
the astounding increase of speed in the technological world is sight. 
But the world of the eye is causing us to live increasingly in a perpetual 
present, flattened by speed, lack of depth and simultaneity. Visual images 
have become commodities, as Harvey points out: ‘A rush of images from 
different  spaces almost simultaneously, collapsing the world’s spaces into 
a series of images on a television screen [. . .] The image of places and 
spaces become as open to production and ephemeral use as any other 
[commodity]’.34
The dramatic shattering of the inherited experiential construction of 
reality in recent decades has undoubtedly resulted in a crisis of identity and 
representation. We can even identify a certain panicked hysteria of representation 
in the arts of our time.
The Narcissistic and Nihilistic Eye
The hegemony of sight first brought forth glorious visions, in Heidegger’s 
view, but it has turned increasingly nihilistic in modern times. 
Heidegger’s observation of a nihilistic eye is particularly thought-­provoking 
today; many of the architectural projects of the past 20 years, celebrated 
by  the international architectural press, express both narcissism and  
nihilism.
The hegemonic eye seeks domination over all fields of cultural 
production, and it seems to weaken our capacity for empathy, compassion 
and participation with the world. The narcissistic eye views architecture 
solely as a means of self-­expression and as an intellectual–artistic game 
detached from essential mental and societal connections and meanings, 
whereas the nihilistic eye deliberately advances sensory and mental 
detachment and alienation. Instead of reinforcing one’s body-­centred and 
integrated experience of the world, nihilistic architecture disengages and 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

17
isolates the body, and instead of attempting to reconstruct cultural order, it 
makes a reading of collective signification impossible. The world becomes 
a hedonistic but meaningless visual journey. It is clear that only the 
distancing and detaching sense of vision is capable of a nihilistic attitude; it 
is impossible to think of a nihilistic sense of touch, for instance, because of 
the unavoidable nearness, intimacy, veracity and identification that the 
sense of touch carries. A sadistic as well as a masochistic eye also exists, and 
their instruments in the fields of contemporary arts and architecture can 
also be identified.
The current industrial mass production of visual imagery tends to alienate 
vision from emotional involvement and identification and turn imagery into a 
mesmerising flow without focus or participation. Michel de Certeau perceives 
the expansion of the ocular realm negatively indeed: ‘From television to 
newspapers, from advertising to all sorts of mercantile epiphanies, our society is 
characterised by a cancerous growth of vision, measuring everything by its ability 
to show or be shown, and transmuting communication into a visual journey’.35 
The cancerous spread of superficial architectural imagery today, devoid of 
tectonic logic and a sense of materiality and empathy, is clearly part of this process.
Oral Versus Visual Space
But man has not always been dominated by vision. In fact, a primordial 
dominance of hearing has only gradually been replaced by that of vision. 
Anthropological literature describes numerous cultures in which our private 
senses of smell, taste and touch continue to have collective importance in 
behaviour and communication. The roles of the senses in the utilisation of 
collective and personal space in various cultures were the subject matter of 
Edward T Hall’s seminal book The Hidden Dimension, which, regrettably, seems 
to have been forgotten by architects.36 Hall’s proxemic studies of personal space 
offer important insights into instinctual and unconscious aspects of our relation 
to space and our unconscious use of space in behavioural communication. 
Hall’s insights can serve as the basis for the design of intimate, bio-­culturally 
functional and meaningful spaces.
Walter J Ong analyses the transition from oral to written culture and its 
impact on human consciousness and the sense of the collective in his book 
Orality and Literacy.37 He points out that ‘the shift from oral to written speech 
was essentially a shift from sound to visual space’,38 and that ‘print replaced the 
lingering hearing-­dominance in the world of thought and expression with the 
sight-­dominance which had its beginning in writing’.39 In Ong’s view, ‘[t]his is 
an insistent world of cold, non-­human facts’.40
Ong analyses the changes that the shift from the primordial oral culture 
to the culture of the written (and eventually the printed) word has caused in 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

18
3
4
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

19
human consciousness, memory and understanding of space. He argues that as 
hearing-­dominance has yielded to sight-­dominance, situational thinking has 
been replaced by abstract thinking. This fundamental change in the perception 
and understanding of the world seems irreversible to the writer: ‘Though 
words are grounded in oral speech, writing tyrannically locks them into a 
visual field forever [. . .] a literate person cannot fully recover a sense of what 
the word is to purely oral people’.41
In fact, the unchallenged hegemony of the eye may be a fairly recent 
phenomenon regardless of its origins in Greek thought and optics. In Lucien 
Febvre’s view: ‘The sixteenth century did not see first: it heard and smelled, it 
sniffed the air and caught sounds. It was only later that it seriously and actively 
became engaged in geometry, focusing attention on the world of forms with 
Kepler (1571–1630) and Desargues of Lyon (1593–1662). It was then that 
vision was unleashed in the world of science as it was in the world of physical 
sensations, and the world of beauty as well’.42 Robert Mandrou makes a parallel 
argument: ‘The hierarchy [of the senses] was not the same [as in the twentieth 
century] because the eye, which rules today, found itself in third place, behind 
hearing and touch, and far after them. The eye that organises, classifies and 
orders was not the favoured organ of a time that preferred hearing’.43
The gradually growing hegemony of the eye seems to be parallel with the 
development of Western ego-­consciousness and the gradually increasing 
separation of the self and the world; vision separates us from the world, whereas 
the other senses unite us with it.
THE POWER AND THE WEAKNESS  
OF THE EYE
3	 Particularly in modern times,  
vision has been strengthened  
by numerous technological  
inventions. We are now able to  
see deep into both the secrets of 
matter and the immensities of  
outer space.
	 The eye of the camera, detail  
from the film The Man with a  
Movie Camera by Dziga Vertov,  
1929.
4	 Regardless of our prioritisation  
of the eye, visual observation is 
often confirmed by our touch.
	 Caravaggio, The Incredulity of  
Saint Thomas (detail), 1601–2, 
Sanssouci Picture Gallery,  
Potsdam.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

20
Artistic expression is engaged with pre-­verbal meanings of the world, 
meanings that are incorporated and lived rather than simply intellectually 
understood. In my view, poetry has the capacity to bring us momentarily 
back to the oral and enveloping world. The re-­oralised word of poetry 
brings us back to the centre of an interior world. The poet speaks not only 
‘on the threshold of being’, as Gaston Bachelard notes,44 but also on the 
threshold of language. Equally, the task of art and architecture in general is 
to reconstruct the experience of an undifferentiated interior world, in 
which we are not mere spectators, but to which we inseparably belong. In 
artistic works, existential understanding arises from our very encounter with 
the world and our being-­in-­the-­world  – it is not conceptualised or 
intellectualised.
Retinal Architecture and the Loss of Plasticity
It is evident that the architecture of traditional cultures is also essentially 
connected with the tacit wisdom of the body, instead of being visually and 
conceptually structured and dominated. Construction in traditional 
cultures is guided by the body – not only the individual body but also the 
societal and cultural bodies – in the same way that a bird shapes its nest by 
movements of its body. Indigenous clay and mud architectures in various 
parts of the world seem to be born of the muscular and haptic senses more 
than the eye. We can even identify the transition of indigenous construction 
from the haptic realm into the control of vision as a loss of plasticity and 
intimacy and of the sense of total fusion characteristic in the settings of 
indigenous cultures.
The dominance of the sense of vision pointed out in philosophical 
thought is equally evident in the development of Western architecture. Greek 
architecture, with its elaborate systems of optical corrections, was already 
ultimately refined for the pleasure of the eye. However, the privileging of sight 
does not necessarily imply a rejection of the other senses, as the haptic 
sensibility, materiality and authoritative weight of Greek architecture prove; 
the eye invites and stimulates muscular and tactile sensations. The sense of 
sight may incorporate, and even reinforce, other sense modalities; the 
unconscious tactile ingredient in vision is particularly important and strongly 
present in historical architecture, but badly neglected in the architecture 
of our time.
Western architectural theory since Leon Battista Alberti has been 
primarily engaged with questions of visual perception, harmony and proportion. 
Alberti’s statement that ‘painting is nothing but the intersection of the visual 
pyramid following a given distance, a fixed centre and a certain lighting’ 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

21
outlines the perspectival paradigm, which also became the instrument of 
architectural thinking.45 Again, it has to be emphasised that the conscious 
focusing on the mechanics of vision did not automatically result in the 
decisive and deliberate rejection of other senses before our own era of 
the omnipresent manipulating visual image. The eye conquers its hegemonic 
role in architectural practice, both consciously and unconsciously, only 
gradually with the emergence of the idea of a bodiless observer. The observer 
becomes detached from an incarnate and existential relation with the 
environment through the suppression of the other senses, in particular by 
means of technological extensions of the eye, and the proliferation of images. 
As Marx W Wartofsky argues, ‘the human vision is itself an artifact, produced 
by other artifacts, namely pictures’.46
The dominant sense of vision figures strongly in the writings of the 
Modernists. Statements by Le Corbusier – such as: ‘I exist in life only if I 
can see’;47 ‘I am and I remain an impenitent visual – everything is in the 
visual’;48 ‘One needs to see clearly in order to understand’;49 ‘I urge you to 
open your eyes. Do you open your eyes? Are you trained to open your eyes? 
Do you know how to open your eyes, do you open them often, always, 
well?’;50 ‘Man looks at the creation of architecture with his eyes, which are 
5 feet 6 inches from the ground’51 and, ‘Architecture is a plastic thing. I 
mean by “plastic” what is seen and measured by the eyes’52 – make the 
privileging of the eye in early Modernist theory very clear. Further 
declarations by Walter Gropius – ‘He [the designer] has to adapt knowledge 
of the scientific facts of optics and thus obtain a theoretical ground that 
will guide the hand giving shape, and create an objective basis’53 and by 
László Moholy-­Nagy: ‘The hygiene of the optical, the health of the visible 
is slowly filtering through’54  – confirm the central role of vision in 
Modernist thought.
Le Corbusier’s famous credo, ‘Architecture is the masterly, correct and 
magnificent play of masses brought together in light’,55 unquestionably 
defines an architecture of the eye. Le Corbusier, however, was a great 
artistic talent with a moulding hand and a tremendous sense of materiality, 
plasticity and gravity, all of which prevented his architecture from turning 
into sensory reductivism. Regardless of Le Corbusier’s Cartesian 
ocularcentric exclamations, the hand had a similar fetishistic role in his 
work as the eye. A vigorous element of tactility is present in Le Corbusier’s 
sketches and paintings, and this haptic sensibility is incorporated into 
his  regard for architecture. However, the reductive bias becomes 
devastating in his urbanistic projects and the uncritical acceptance of his 
theorizing.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

22
5
6
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

23
In Mies van der Rohe’s architecture, a frontal perspectival perception 
predominates, but his unique sense of order, structure, weight, detail and craft 
decisively enriches the visual paradigm. Moreover, an architectural work is 
great precisely because of the oppositional and contradictory intentions and 
allusions it succeeds in fusing together. A tension between conscious intentions 
and unconscious drives is necessary for a work in order to open up the 
emotional participation of the observer. ‘In every case one must achieve a 
simultaneous solution of opposites’, as Alvar Aalto wrote.56 The verbal 
statements of artists and architects should not usually be taken at their face 
value, as they often merely represent a conscious surface rationalisation, or an 
intellectualized defence, that may well be in sharp contradiction with the 
deeper unconscious intentions giving the work its very life force.
With equal clarity, the visual paradigm is the prevailing condition in city 
planning, from the idealised town plans of the Renaissance to the Functionalist 
principles of zoning and planning that reflect the ‘hygiene of the optical’. In 
particular, the contemporary city is increasingly the city of the eye, detached 
from the body by rapid motorised movement, or through the overall aerial 
grasp from an aeroplane. The processes of planning have favoured the idealising 
and disembodied Cartesian eye of control and detachment; city plans are highly 
idealised and schematised visions seen through le regard surplombant (the look 
from above), as defined by Jean Starobinski,57 or through ‘the mind’s eye’ of Plato.
Until recently, architectural theory and criticism have been almost 
exclusively engaged with the mechanisms of vision and visual expression. The 
perception and experience of architectural form has most frequently been 
analysed through the Gestalt laws of visual perception. Educational philosophy 
has likewise understood architecture primarily in terms of vision, emphasising 
the construction of three-­dimensional visual images in space.
THE SUPPRESSION OF VISION – THE FUSION OF 
VISION AND TACTILITY
5	 In heightened emotional states 
and deep thought, vision is usually 
repressed.
	 René Magritte, The Lovers  
(detail), 1928, Museum of  
Modern Art, New York (gift of  
Richard S Zeisler).
6	 Vision and the tactile sense are 
fused in actual lived experience.
	 Herbert Bayer, Lonely  
Metropolitan, 1932 (detail), Buhl 
Collection.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

24
An Architecture of Visual Images
The ocular bias has never been more apparent in the art of architecture than in 
the past half century, as a type of architecture, aimed at a striking and memorable 
visual image, has predominated. Instead of an existentially grounded plastic and 
spatial experience, architecture has adopted the psychological strategy of 
advertising and instant persuasion; buildings have turned into image products 
detached from existential depth, veracity and sincerity. Instead of mediating and 
fusing the multitude of aspects of the environments, the architecture of the 
modern era has tended to separate and isolate. Instead of aspiring for harmony, 
contrasts have been sought.
David Harvey relates ‘the loss of temporality and the search for instantaneous 
impact’ in contemporary expression to the loss of experiential depth.58 Fredric 
Jameson uses the notion of ‘contrived depthlessness’ to describe the contemporary 
cultural condition and ‘its fixation with appearances, surfaces and instant impacts 
that have no sustaining power over time’.59 The experiential depth arises from 
the fusion of conscious, focused vision and unconscious, unfocused peripheral 
expressions, as well as the dialogue between the work and the world.
Artistic and architectural meaning is always relational and mediating. It 
expresses our relation with the world rather than itself. Maurice Merleau-­
Ponty expresses this fundamental relatedness of art succinctly: ‘We come to see 
not the work of art, but the world according to the work’.60
As a consequence of the current deluge of images, architecture of our 
time most often appears as mere retinal art, thus completing an epistemological 
cycle that began in Greek thought and architecture. But the change goes 
beyond mere visual dominance; instead of being a situational bodily encounter, 
architecture has become an art of the printed image fixed by the hurried eye 
of the camera. In our culture of pictures, the gaze itself flattens into a picture 
and loses its plasticity. Instead of experiencing our being in the world, we 
behold it from outside as spectators of images projected on the surface of the 
retina. David Michael Levin uses the term ‘frontal ontology’ to describe the 
prevailing frontal, fixated and focused vision.61
Susan Sontag has made perceptive remarks on the role of the 
photographed image in our perception of the world. She writes, for instance, 
of a ‘mentality which looks at the world as a set of potential photographs’,62 
and argues that ‘the reality has come to seem more and more what we are 
shown by camera’,63 and that ‘the omnipresence of photographs has an 
incalculable effect on our ethical sensibility. By furnishing this already crowded 
world with a duplicate one of images, photography makes us feel that the 
world is more available than it really is’.64
As buildings lose their plasticity and their connection with the language 
and wisdom of the body, they become isolated in the cool and distant realm of 
vision. With the loss of tactility, measures and details crafted for the human 
body  – and particularly for the hand  – architectural structures become 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

25
repulsively flat, sharp-­edged, immaterial and unreal. The detachment of 
construction from the realities of matter and craft further turns architecture 
into stage sets for the eye, into a scenography devoid of the authenticity of 
matter and construction. The sense of ‘aura’, the authority of presence, that 
Walter Benjamin regards as a necessary quality for an authentic piece of art, has 
been lost. These products of instrumentalised technology conceal their 
processes of construction, appearing as ghostlike apparitions. The increasing 
use of reflective glass in architecture reinforces the dreamlike sense of unreality 
and alienation. The contradictory, opaque transparency of these buildings 
reflects the gaze back unaffected and unmoved; we are unable to see or imagine 
life behind these absent walls. The architectural mirror, that returns our gaze 
and doubles the world, is an enigmatic and frightening device.
Materiality and Time
The flatness of today’s standard construction is strengthened by a weakened 
sense of materiality. Natural materials – stone, brick and wood – allow our 
vision to penetrate their surfaces and enable us to become convinced of the 
veracity of matter. Natural materials express their age, as well as the story of 
their biological origins and their history of human manufacture and timeless 
use. All matter exists in the continuum of time; the patina of wear adds the 
enriching experience of time to the materials of construction. But the 
machine-­made materials of today – scaleless sheets of glass, enamelled metals 
and synthetic plastics – tend to present their unyielding surfaces to the eye 
without conveying their material essence or age. Buildings of this technological 
era usually deliberately aim at ageless perfection, and they do not incorporate 
the dimension of time, or the unavoidable and mentally significant processes of 
ageing. This fear of the traces of wear and age is surely related to our unconscious 
uneasiness with or fear of death. The relation of our culture ‘of reason’ to death 
is becoming increasingly problematic in comparison to traditional societies 
whose relation to the unavoidability of decay and death was less problematic.
Transparency and sensations of weightlessness and flotation are central 
themes in modern art and architecture. In recent decades, a new architectural 
imagery has emerged, which employs reflection, gradations of transparency, 
overlay and juxtaposition to create a sense of spatial thickness, as well as subtle and 
changing sensations of movement and light. This new sensibility promises an 
architecture that can turn the relative immateriality and weightlessness of recent 
technological construction into a positive experience of place and meaning. The 
weakening of the experience of time in today’s environments has devastating 
mental effects. In the words of the American therapist Gotthard Booth, ‘nothing 
gives man fuller satisfaction than participation in processes that supersede the span 
of individual life’.65 We have a mental need to grasp that we are rooted in the 
continuity of time, and in the man-­made world it is the task of architecture to 
facilitate this temporal experience. Architecture domesticates and names limitless 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

26
space and enables us to inhabit it, but it should likewise domesticate endless time 
and enable us to inhabit the continuum of time. The earliest human construction 
was not a construction, but a recognition and marking of a place, and, much later, 
naming a place; by marking and naming we take possession of things.
The current overemphasis on the intellectual and conceptual dimensions 
of architecture contributes to the disappearance of its physical, sensual and 
embodied essences. Contemporary architecture posing as the avant-­garde is 
more often engaged with the architectural discourse itself and mapping the 
possible marginal territories of the art than with responding to genuine human 
existential questions. This reductive focus gives rise to a sense of architectural 
autism, an internalised and autonomous discourse that is not grounded in our 
shared existential reality and desire.
Beyond architecture, contemporary culture at large drifts towards a 
distancing, a kind of chilling de-­sensualisation and de-­eroticisation of the 
human relation to reality. Painting and sculpture also seem to be losing their 
sensuality; instead of inviting a sensory intimacy, contemporary works of art 
frequently signal a distancing rejection of sensuous curiosity and pleasure. 
These works speak to the intellect and to the conceptualising capacities 
instead of addressing the senses and the undifferentiated embodied responses. 
The ceaseless bombardment of unrelated imagery leads to a gradual 
emptying of images of their emotional content. Images are converted into 
endless commodities manufactured to postpone boredom; humans in turn 
are commodified, consuming themselves nonchalantly without having the 
courage or even the possibility of confronting their very existential reality. 
We are now made to live in fabricated dream worlds.
I do not wish to express a conservative view of contemporary art in the tone 
of Hans Sedlmayr’s thought-­provoking but disturbing book Art in Crisis.66 I 
merely suggest that a distinct change has occurred in our sensory and perceptual 
THE CITY OF THE EYE – THE  
HAPTIC CITY
7	 The contemporary city is the  
city of the eye, one of distance  
and exteriority.
	 Le Corbusier’s proposed skyline  
for Buenos Aires – a sketch  
from a lecture given in Buenos  
Aires in 1929.
8	 The haptic city is the city of 
interiority and nearness.
	 The hill town of Casares,  
southern Spain.
	 Photo: Juhani Pallasmaa
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

27
7
8
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

28
experience of the world, one that is reflected in art and architecture. If we desire 
architecture to have an emancipating or healing role, instead of reinforcing the 
erosion of existential meaning, we must reflect on the multitude of secret ways in 
which the art of architecture is tied to the cultural and mental reality of its time. 
We should also be aware of the ways in which the feasibility of architecture is 
being threatened or marginalised by current political, cultural, economic, cognitive 
and perceptual developments. Architecture has become an endangered art form.
The Rejection of Alberti’s Window
The eye itself has not, of course, remained in the monocular, fixed construction 
defined by Renaissance theories of perspective. The hegemonic eye has 
conquered new ground for visual perception and expression. The paintings of 
Hieronymus Bosch and Pieter Bruegel, for instance, invite a participatory eye to 
travel across the scenes of multiple events. The 17th-­century Dutch paintings of 
bourgeois life present casual scenes and objects of everyday use which expand 
beyond the boundaries of the Albertian window. Baroque paintings open up 
vision with hazy edges, soft focus and multiple perspectives, presenting a distinct, 
tactile invitation and enticing the body to travel through the illusory space.
An essential line in the evolution of modernity has been the liberation 
of the eye from the Cartesian perspectival epistemology. The paintings of 
ARCHITECTURE AND  
THE HUMAN FIGURE
9	 We tend to interpret a building  
as an analogue to our body, and  
vice versa.
	 Caryatids of the Erechtheum  
on the Acropolis of Athens  
(421–405 bc), British Museum,  
London.
10	 Since the dynasties of  
ancient Egypt, measures of the 
human body have been used in 
architecture. The anthropocentric 
tradition has been almost entirely 
forgotten in modern times.
	
Aulis Blomstedt’s study of a 
proportional system for architecture 
based on the Pythagorean 
subdivision of a basic 180 cm 
measure (presumably from the early 
1960s).
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

29
9
10
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

30
Joseph Mallord William Turner continue the elimination of the picture frame 
and the vantage point begun in the Baroque era; the Impressionists abandon 
the boundary line, balanced framing and perspectival depth; Paul Cézanne 
aspires ‘to make visible how the world touches us’;67 Cubists abandon the 
single focal point, reactivate peripheral vision and reinforce haptic experience, 
whereas the colour field painters reject illusory depth in order to reinforce 
the presence of the painting itself as an iconic artefact and an autonomous 
reality. Land artists fuse the reality of the work with the reality of the lived 
world, and finally, artists such as Richard Serra directly address the body as 
well as our experiences of horizontality and verticality, materiality, gravity 
and weight.
The same countercurrent against the hegemony of the perspectival eye 
has taken place in modern architecture regardless of the culturally privileged 
position of vision. The kinaesthetic and textural architecture of Frank Lloyd 
Wright, the muscular and tactile buildings of Alvar Aalto and Louis Kahn’s 
architecture of geometry and gravitas are particularly significant examples of this.
A New Vision and Sensory Balance
Perhaps, freed of the implicit desire of the eye for control and power, it is 
precisely the unfocused vision of our time that is again capable of opening up 
new realms of vision and thought. The loss of focus brought about by the 
stream of images may emancipate the eye from its patriarchal domination and 
give rise to a participatory and empathetic gaze. The technological extensions 
of the senses have until now reinforced the primacy of vision, but the new 
technologies may also help ‘the body [. . .] to dethrone the disinterested gaze 
of the disincarnated Cartesian spectator’.68
Martin Jay remarks: ‘In opposition to the lucid, linear, solid, fixed, 
planimetric, closed form of the Renaissance [. . .] the baroque was painterly, 
recessional, soft-­focused, multiple, and open’.69 He also argues that the ‘baroque 
visual experience has a strongly tactile or haptic quality, which prevents it from 
turning into the absolute ocularcentrism of its Cartesian perspectivalist rival’.70
The haptic experience seems to be penetrating the ocular regime again 
through the tactile presence of modern visual imagery. In a music video, for 
instance, or the layered contemporary urban transparency, we cannot halt the 
flow of images for analytic observation; instead, we have to appreciate it as an 
enhanced haptic sensation, rather like a swimmer senses the flow of water 
against his/her skin.
In his thorough and thought-­provoking book The Opening of Vision: 
Nihilism and the Postmodern Situation, David Michael Levin differentiates 
between two modes of vision: ‘the assertoric gaze’ and ‘the aletheic gaze’.71 In 
his view, the assertoric gaze is narrow, dogmatic, intolerant, rigid, fixed, 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

31
inflexible, exclusionary and unmoved, whereas the aletheic gaze, associated 
with the hermeneutic theory of truth, tends to see from a multiplicity of 
standpoints and perspectives, and is multiple, pluralistic, democratic, contextual, 
inclusionary, horizontal and caring.72 As suggested by Levin, there are signs that 
a new mode of looking is emerging.
Although the new technologies have strengthened the hegemony of 
vision, they may also help to re-­balance the realms of the senses. In Walter 
Ong’s view, ‘with telephone, radio, television and various kinds of sound tape, 
electronic technology has brought us into the age of “secondary orality”. 
This new orality has striking resemblances to the old in its participatory 
mystique, its fostering of communal sense, its concentration on the present 
moment [. . .]’.73
‘We in the Western world are beginning to discover our neglected senses. 
This growing awareness represents something of an overdue insurgency against 
the painful deprivation of sensory experience we have suffered in our 
technologised world’, writes the anthropologist Ashley Montagu.74 This new 
awareness is forcefully projected by numerous architects around the world 
today who are attempting to re-­sensualise architecture through a strengthened 
sense of materiality and hapticity, texture and weight, density of space and 
materialised light.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the Senses, Fourth Edition. Juhani Pallasmaa.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
PART 
TWO
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

33
As the preceding brief survey suggests, the privileging of the sense of sight 
over the other senses is an inarguable theme in Western thought, and it has 
also turned into an evident bias in the theory, thinking and practice of 
architecture in the modern era. This negative development in architecture is, 
of course, forcefully supported by forces and patterns of management, 
organisation, production and economic system, as well as by the abstracting 
and universalising impact of technological rationality and value system itself. 
The negative developments in the realm of the senses cannot, either, be 
directly attributed to the historical privileging of the sense of vision itself. The 
understanding of sight as our most important sense is well grounded in 
physiological, perceptual and psychological facts.75 The problems arise from 
the isolation of the eye outside its natural and biological interaction with the 
other sense modalities and from the unconscious elimination and suppression 
of other senses, which increasingly reduce and restrict the experience of the 
world into the sphere of vision. This separation and reduction fragments the 
innate complexity, comprehensiveness and plasticity of the perceptual system, 
reinforcing the experience of a sense of detachment and alienation, ‘the 
existential outsideness’, to use the expression of Edward Relph in Place and 
Placelessness.76
In this second part, I will survey the interactions of the senses and give 
some personal impressions of the realms of the senses in the expression and 
experience of architecture. In this essay, I proclaim an integrated sensory 
architecture in opposition to the prevailing visual understanding of the art 
of building.
The Body in the Centre
I confront the city with my body; my legs measure the length of the arcade 
and the width of the square; my gaze unconsciously projects my body onto 
the facade of the cathedral, where it roams over the mouldings and contours, 
sensing the size of recesses and projections; my body weight meets the mass 
of the cathedral door, and my hand grasps the door pull as I enter the silent 
dark void behind. I experience myself in the city, and the city exists through 
my embodied experience. The city and my body supplement and define 
each other. I dwell in the city, and the city dwells in me. Architecture is the 
artform of perpetual relatedness and exchange. John Dewey suggested that 
the human mind is a verb;77 I suggest that architecture is also a verb instead 
of a noun.
Merleau-­Ponty’s philosophy makes the human body the centre of the 
experiential world. He consistently argued, as Richard Kearney summarises, 
that ‘[i]t is through our bodies as living centres of intentionality [. . .] that we 
choose our world and that our world chooses us’.78 In Merleau-­Ponty’s own 
words, ‘Our own body is in the world as the heart is in the organism: it keeps 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

34
the visible spectacle constantly alive, it breathes life into it and sustains it 
inwardly, and with it forms a system’;79 and ‘[s]ensory experience is unstable 
and alien to natural perception, which we achieve with our whole body all at 
once, and which opens on a world of interacting senses’.80
Sensory experiences become integrated through the body, or rather, in 
the very constitution of the body and the human mode of being. Psychoanalytic 
theory has introduced the notion of body image or body schema as the centre 
of integration. Human existence is a relational and relating mode of being. 
Our bodies and movements are in constant interaction with the environment; 
the world and the self inform and redefine each other constantly. The percept 
of the body and the image of the world turn into one single continuous 
existential experience of being; there is no body separate from its domicile in 
place, and there is no space unrelated to the unconscious image of the 
perceiving self. ‘The body image [. . .] is informed fundamentally from haptic 
and orienting experiences early in life. Our visual images are developed later 
on, and depend for their meaning on primal experiences that were acquired 
haptically’, Kent C Bloomer and Charles W Moore argue in their 1977 book 
Body, Memory, and Architecture, one of the first serious studies to survey the role 
of the body and of the senses in architectural experience.81 They go on to 
explain: ‘What is missing from our dwellings today are the potential 
transactions between body, imagination, and environment’;82 . . . ‘To at least 
some extent every place can be remembered, partly because it is unique, but 
partly because it has affected our bodies and generated enough associations to 
hold it in our personal worlds’.83
Multi-­Sensory Experience
A walk through a forest is invigorating and healing due to the constant 
interaction of all sense modalities; Bachelard speaks of ‘the polyphony of the 
senses’.84 The eye collaborates naturally with the body and the other senses. 
One’s sense of reality and self is strengthened and articulated by this constant 
interaction. Architecture is essentially an extension of nature into the human-­
made realm, providing the ground for perception and the horizon for 
experiencing and understanding the world. It is not an isolated and self-­
sufficient artefact; it directs our attention and existential experience to wider 
horizons. Architecture also gives a conceptual and material structure to societal 
institutions as well as to the conditions of daily life. Even ideas of urbanity and 
social institutions are administrative abstractions until they become materialised 
in architecture. It also concretises the cycle of the year, the course of the sun 
and the passing of the hours of the day.
Every touching experience of architecture is multi-­sensory; qualities of 
place, matter and scale are measured equally by the eye, ear, nose, skin, tongue, 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

35
skeleton and muscle. Architecture grounds us and strengthens our existential 
experience, our sense of being in the world, and this is essentially a strengthened 
experience of self. Instead of mere vision, or the five classical senses, architecture 
involves several realms of sensory experience which interact and fuse with 
each other.85
The psychologist James J Gibson regards the senses as aggressively 
seeking mechanisms rather than mere passive receivers. Instead of the five 
detached senses, Gibson categorises the senses into five sensory systems: the 
visual system, the auditory system, the taste–smell system, the basic-­orienting 
system and the haptic system.86 Steinerian philosophy assumes that we 
actually utilise no fewer than 12 senses.87 The Sixth Sense Reader edited by 
David Howes even suggests that we have over thirty systems of sensing. We 
are only beginning to understand the utterly complex functions of our 
intestinal bacteria in mediating our relationship with our environment; a 
French scientific television programme called the complexities of our 
intestinal universe ‘our second brain’.
The eyes want to collaborate with the other senses. All the senses, 
including vision, can be regarded as extensions of the sense of touch  – as 
specialisations of the skin. They define the interface between the skin and the 
environment  – between the opaque interiority of the body and the open 
exteriority of the world. In the view of René Spitz, ‘all perception begins in 
the oral cavity, which serves as the primeval bridge from inner reception to 
external perception’.88 Even the eye touches; the gaze implies an unconscious 
touch, bodily mimesis and identification.
As Martin Jay remarks when describing Merleau-­Ponty’s philosophy of 
the senses, ‘through vision we touch the sun and the stars’.89 Preceding 
Merleau-­Ponty, the 18th-­century Irish philosopher and clergyman George 
Berkeley related touch with vision and assumed that visual apprehension of 
materiality, distance and spatial depth would not be possible at all without the 
cooperation of the haptic memory. In Berkeley’s view, vision needs the help of 
touch, which provides sensations of ‘solidity, resistance, and protrusion’;90 sight 
detached from touch could not ‘have any idea of distance, outness, or profundity, 
nor consequently of space or body’.91 In accord with Berkeley, Hegel claimed 
that the only sense which can give a sensation of spatial depth is touch, because 
touch ‘senses the weight, resistance, and three-­dimensional shape (gestalt) of 
material bodies, and thus makes us aware that things extend away from us in all 
directions’.92
Vision reveals what the touch already knows. We could think of the sense 
of touch as the unconscious of vision. Our eyes stroke distant surfaces, contours 
and edges, and the unconscious tactile sensation determines the agreeableness 
or unpleasantness of the experience. The distant and the near are experienced 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

36
with the same intensity, and they merge into one coherent experience. In the 
words of Merleau-­Ponty:
We see the depth, the smoothness, the softness, the hardness of objects; Cézanne 
even claimed that we see their odor. If the painter is to express the world, the 
arrangement of his colors must carry with it this indivisible whole, or else his 
­picture will only hint at things and will not give them in the imperious unity, the 
presence, the insurpassable plenitude which is for us the definition of the real.93
In developing further Goethe’s idea that a work of art must be ‘life-­
enhancing’,94 Bernard Berenson suggested that when experiencing an artistic 
work, we imagine a genuine physical encounter through ‘ideated sensations’. 
The most important of these he called ‘tactile values’.95 In his view, the work 
of authentic art stimulates our ideated sensations of touch, and this stimulation 
is life-­enhancing. Indeed, we do feel the warmth of the water in the bathtub in 
Pierre Bonnard’s paintings of bathing nudes and the moist air of Turner’s 
landscapes, and we can sense the heat of the sun and the cool breeze in Matisse’s 
paintings of windows open to a view of the sea.
In the same way, an architectural work generates an indivisible complex of 
impressions. The live encounter with Frank Lloyd Wright’s Fallingwater weaves 
the surrounding forest, the volumes, surfaces, textures and colours of the house, 
and even the smells of the forest and the sounds of the river, into a uniquely full 
experience. An architectural work is not experienced as a collection of isolated 
visual pictures, but in its fully embodied material, existential and spiritual 
presence. A work of architecture incorporates and infuses both physical and 
THE CITY OF PARTICIPATION –  
THE CITY OF ALIENATION
11	 The city of sensory  
engagement.
	
Pieter Bruegel the Elder,  
Children’s Games (detail), 1560, 
Kunsthistorisches Museum  
with MVK and ÖTM, Vienna.
12	 The modern city of sensory 
deprivation.
	
The commercial section of 
Brasília, Brazil, 1968. Photo: 
Juhani Pallasmaa
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

37
11
12
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

38
mental structures. The visual frontality of the architectural drawing is lost in the 
real experience of architecture. Good architecture offers shapes and surfaces 
moulded for the pleasurable touch of the eye. ‘Contour and profile (modénature) 
are the touchstone of the architect’, as Le Corbusier put it, revealing a tactile 
ingredient in his otherwise ocular understanding of architecture.96
Images of one sensory realm feed further imagery in another modality. 
Images of presence give rise to images of memory, imagination and dream. ‘[T]he 
chief benefit of the house [is that] the house shelters daydreaming, the house 
protects the dreamer, the house allows one to dream in peace’, writes Bachelard.97 
But even more, the experience of an architectural space frames, halts, strengthens 
and focuses our thoughts, and prevents them from getting lost. We can dream and 
sense our being outdoors, but we need the architectural geometry of a room to 
think clearly. The geometry of thought echoes the geometry of the room.
In The Book of Tea, Kakuzo Okakura gives a subtle description of the multi-­
sensory imagery evoked by the simple situation of the Japanese tea ceremony:
Quiet reigns with nothing to break the silence save the note of the boiling water in 
the iron kettle. The kettle sings well, for pieces of iron are so arranged in the bottom 
as to produce a peculiar melody in which one may hear the echoes of a cataract 
muffled by clouds, of a distant sea breaking among the rocks, a rainstorm sweeping 
through a bamboo forest, or of the soughing of pines on some faraway hill.98
In Okakura’s description, the present and the absent, the near and the 
distant and the sensed and the imagined fuse together. The body is not a mere 
physical entity; it is enriched by both memory and dream, past and future. 
Edward S Casey even argues that our capacity for memory would be impossible 
without a body memory.99 The world is reflected in the body, and the body is 
projected onto the world. We remember through our bodies as much as 
through our nervous system and brain.
The senses not only mediate information for the judgement of the 
intellect; they are also a means of igniting the imagination and of articulating 
sensory thought. Each form of art elaborates metaphysical and existential 
thought through its characteristic medium and sensory engagement. ‘Any 
theory of painting is a metaphysics’, in Merleau-­Ponty’s view,100 but this 
statement might also be extended to the actual making of art, for every painting 
is itself based on implicit assumptions about the essence of the world. ‘The 
painter “takes his body with him,” says [Paul] Valéry. Indeed we cannot imagine 
how a mind could paint’, Merleau-­Ponty argues.101
It is similarly inconceivable that we could think of purely cerebral 
architecture that would not be a projection of the human body and its sensory 
and experiential projections and movements through space. The art of architecture 
is also engaged with metaphysical and existential questions concerning our being 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

39
in the world. The making of architecture calls for clear thinking, but this is a 
specific embodied and existential mode of thought that takes place through the 
senses and the body, and through the specific medium of architecture. Architecture 
elaborates and communicates thoughts of man’s incarnate confrontation with the 
world through ‘plastic emotions’, to use an expression of Le Corbusier.102 In my 
view, the task of architecture is ‘to make visible how the world touches us’, as 
Merleau-­Ponty said of the paintings of Paul Cézanne.103
The Significance of the Shadow
The eye is the organ of distance and separation, whereas touch is the sense of 
nearness, intimacy and affection. The eye surveys, controls and investigates, 
whereas touch approaches and caresses. During overpowering emotional 
experiences, we tend to close off the distancing sense of vision; we close the eyes 
when dreaming, listening to music, or caressing our beloved ones. The eye 
receives gestures of affections, but the hand returns them. Deep shadows and 
darkness are essential, because they dim the sharpness of vision, make depth and 
distance ambiguous and invite unconscious peripheral vision and tactile fantasy.
How much more mysterious and inviting is the street of an old town with 
its alternating realms of darkness and light than are the brightly and evenly lit 
streets of today! The imagination and daydreaming are stimulated by dim light 
and shadow. In order to think clearly, the sharpness of vision has to be suppressed, 
for thoughts travel with an absent-­minded and unfocused gaze. Homogeneous 
bright light paralyses the imagination in the same way that homogenisation of 
space weakens the experience of being, and wipes away the sense of place. The 
human eye is most perfectly tuned for twilight rather than bright daylight.
Mist and twilight awaken the imagination by making visual images 
unclear and ambiguous; a Chinese painting of a foggy mountain landscape, or 
the raked sand garden of Ryoan-­ji Zen Garden, give rise to an unfocused way 
of looking, evoking a trance-­like, meditative state. The absent-­minded gaze 
penetrates the surface of the physical image and focuses on infinity.
In his book In Praise of Shadows, Jun’ichirō Tanizaki points out that even 
Japanese cooking depends upon shadows, and that it is inseparable from darkness: 
‘And when Y kan is served in a lacquer dish, it is as if the darkness of the room 
were melting on your tongue’.104 The writer reminds us that, in olden times, the 
blackened teeth of the geisha and her green–black lips as well as her white-­
painted face were all intended to emphasise the darkness and shadows of the room.
Likewise, the extraordinarily powerful sense of focus and presence in the 
paintings of Caravaggio and Rembrandt arises from the depth of shadow in 
which the protagonist is embedded like a precious object on a dark velvet 
background that absorbs all light. The shadow gives shape and life to the object 
in light. It also provides the realm from which fantasies and dreams arise. The 
art of chiaroscuro is a skill of the master architect too. In great architectural 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

40
spaces, there is a constant, deep breathing of shadow and light; shadow inhales 
and illumination exhales light.
In our time, light has turned into a mere quantitative matter, and the 
window has lost its significance as a mediator between two worlds: between 
enclosed and open, interiority and exteriority, private and public, shadow and 
light. Having lost its ontological meaning, the window has turned into a mere 
absence of the wall. Luis Barragán, the true magician of intimate secrecy, 
mystery and shadow in contemporary architecture, writes:
Take [. . .] the use of enormous plate windows [. . .] they deprive our buildings of 
intimacy, the effect of shadow and atmosphere. Architects all over the world have 
been mistaken in the proportions which they have assigned to large plate windows 
or spaces opening to the outside [. . .] We have lost our sense of intimate life, and 
have become forced to live public lives, essentially away from home.105
Likewise, most contemporary public spaces would become more 
enjoyable through a lower light intensity and its uneven distribution. The dark 
womb of the council chamber of Alvar Aalto’s Säynätsalo Town Hall re-­creates 
a mystical and mythological sense of community; darkness creates a sense of 
solidarity and strengthens the power of the spoken word. It also protects the 
individuality and intimacy of the Council members.
In emotional states, sense stimuli seem to shift from the more refined 
senses towards the more archaic, from vision down to hearing, touch and smell, 
and from light to shadow. A culture that seeks to control its citizens is likely to 
promote the opposite direction of interaction, away from intimate individuality 
ARCHITECTURES OF  
HEARING AND SMELL
13	 In historical towns and spaces, 
acoustic experiences reinforce  
and enrich visual experiences.
	
The early Cistercian Abbey  
of Le Thoronet in southern  
France, first established at Florielle  
in 1136, transferred to its present  
site in 1176. Photo: David Heald
14	 In rich and invigorating experiences 
of places, all sensory realms interact 
and fuse into the memorable image 
of the place.
	
A space of smell: the spice market 
in Harrar, Ethiopia. Photo: Juhani 
Pallasmaa
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

41
13
14
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

42
and identification and towards a public and distant detachment and exposure. 
A society of surveillance is necessarily a society of the voyeuristic and sadistic 
eye. An efficient method of mental torture is the use of a constantly high level 
of illumination that leaves no space for mental withdrawal or privacy; even the 
dark interiority of self is exposed and violated.
Acoustic Intimacy
Sight isolates, whereas sound incorporates; vision is directional, whereas sound 
is omni-­directional. The sense of sight implies exteriority, but sound creates an 
experience of interiority. I regard an object, but sound approaches me; the eye 
reaches, but the ear receives. Buildings do not react to our gaze, but they do 
return our sounds back to our ears. ‘The centring action of sound affects man’s 
sense of cosmos’, writes Walter Ong. ‘For oral cultures, the cosmos is an 
ongoing event with man at its centre. Man is the umbilicus mundi, the navel of 
the world’.106 It is thought-­provoking that the mental loss of the sense of centre 
in the contemporary world could be attributed, at least in part, to the 
disappearance of the integrity of the audible world.
Hearing structures and articulates the experience and understanding of 
space. We are not normally aware of the significance of hearing in spatial 
experience, although sound often provides the temporal continuum in which 
visual impressions are embedded. When the soundtrack is removed from a film, 
for instance, the scene loses its plasticity, sense of continuity and life. Silent film, 
indeed, had to compensate for the lack of sound by a demonstrative manner of 
overacting.
Adrian Stokes, the English painter and essayist, makes perceptive 
observations about the interaction of space and sound, sound and stone. ‘Like 
mothers of men, the buildings are good listeners. Long sounds, distinct or 
seemingly in bundles, appease the orifices of palaces that lean back gradually 
from canal or pavement. A long sound with its echo brings consummation to 
the stone’, he writes.107
Anyone who has half-­woken up to the sound of a train or an ambulance 
in a nocturnal city, and through his/her sleep experienced the space of the city 
with its countless inhabitants scattered within its structures, knows the power 
of sound over the imagination; the nocturnal sound is a reminder of human 
solitude and mortality, and it makes one conscious of the entire slumbering 
city. Anyone who has become entranced by the sound of dripping water in the 
darkness of a ruin can attest to the extraordinary capacity of the ear to carve a 
volume into the void of darkness. The space traced by the ear in the darkness 
becomes a cavity sculpted directly in the interior of the mind.
The last chapter of Steen Eiler Rasmussen’s seminal book Experiencing 
Architecture is significantly entitled ‘Hearing Architecture’.108 The writer describes 
various dimensions of acoustical qualities and recalls the acoustic percept of the 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

43
underground tunnels in Vienna in Orson Welles’s film The Third Man: ‘Your ear 
receives the impact of both the length and the cylindrical form of the tunnel’.109
One can also recall the acoustic harshness of an uninhabited and unfurnished 
house as compared with the affability of a lived-­in home, in which sound is 
refracted and softened by the numerous surfaces of objects of personal life. Every 
building or space has its characteristic sound of intimacy or monumentality, 
invitation or rejection, hospitality or hostility. A space is understood and 
appreciated through its echo as much as through its visual shape, but the acoustic 
percept usually remains as an unconscious background experience.
Sight is the sense of the solitary observer, whereas hearing creates a sense 
of connection and solidarity; our look wanders lonesomely in the dark depths 
of a cathedral, but the sound of the organ makes us immediately experience 
our affinity with the space. We stare alone at the suspense of a circus, but the 
burst of applause after the relaxation of suspense unites us with the crowd. The 
sound of church bells echoing through the streets of a town makes us aware of 
our citizenship. The echo of steps on a paved street has an emotional charge 
because the sound reverberating from surrounding walls puts us in direct 
interaction with space; the sound measures space and makes its scale 
comprehensible. We stroke the boundaries of the place and space with our ears. 
The cries of seagulls in the harbour awaken an awareness of the vastness of the 
ocean and the infiniteness of the horizon.
Every city has its echo which depends on the pattern and scale of its streets 
and the prevailing architectural styles and materials. The echo of a Renaissance 
city differs from that of a Baroque city. But our cities have lost their echo 
altogether. The wide, open spaces of contemporary streets do not return sound, 
and in the interiors of today’s buildings echoes are absorbed and censored. The 
programmed recorded music of shopping malls and public spaces eliminates the 
possibility of grasping the acoustic volume of space. Our ears have been blinded.
Silence, Time and Solitude
The most essential auditory experience created by architecture is tranquillity. 
Architecture presents the drama of construction silenced into matter, space and 
light. Ultimately, architecture is the art of petrified silence. When the clutter of 
construction work ceases, and the shouting of workers dies away, a building 
becomes a museum of a waiting, patient silence. In Egyptian temples we 
encounter the silence that surrounded the pharaohs, in the silence of the Gothic 
cathedral we are reminded of the last dying note of a Gregorian chant, and the 
echo of Roman footsteps has just faded away from the walls of the Pantheon. 
Old houses take us back to the slow time and silence of the past. The silence of 
architecture is a responsive, remembering silence. A powerful architectural 
experience silences all external noise; it focuses our attention on our very 
existence, and as with all art, it makes us aware of our fundamental solitude.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

44
The incredible acceleration of speed during the last century has collapsed 
time into the flat screen of the present, upon which the simultaneity of the 
world is projected. As time loses its duration, and its echo in the primordial past, 
man loses his sense of self as a historical being, and is threatened by the ‘terror 
of time’.110 Architecture emancipates us from the embrace of the present and 
allows us to experience the slow, healing flow of time. Buildings and cities are 
instruments and museums of time. They enable us to see and understand the 
passing of history and to participate in time cycles that surpass individual life.
Architecture connects us with the dead; through buildings we are able to 
imagine the bustle of the medieval street and picture a solemn procession 
approaching the cathedral. The time of architecture is a detained time; in the 
greatest of buildings time stands firmly still. In the Great Peristyle at Karnak, 
time has petrified into an immobile and timeless present. Time and space are 
eternally locked into each other in the silent spaces between these immense 
columns; matter, space and time fuse into one singular elemental experience, 
the sense of being.
The great works of modernity have forever preserved the utopian time 
of optimism and hope; even after decades of trying fate, they radiate an air of 
spring and promise. Alvar Aalto’s Paimio Sanatorium is heartbreaking in its 
radiant belief in a humane future and the success of the societal mission of 
architecture. Le Corbusier’s Villa Savoye makes us believe in the union of 
reason and beauty, ethics and aesthetics. Through periods of dramatic and 
tragic social and cultural change, Konstantin Melnikov’s Melnikov House in 
Moscow has stood as a silent witness of the will and utopian spirit that once 
created it.
SPACES OF INTIMATE WARMTH
15	 Heightened experiences of  
intimacy, home and protection  
are sensations of the naked  
skin.
	
Pierre Bonnard, The Nude in the  
Bath (detail), 1937, Musée  
du Petit-­Palais, Paris.
16	 The fireplace as an intimate  
and personal space of warmth.
	
Antoni Gaudí, Casa Batlló, 
Barcelona, 1904–6.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

45
15
16
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

46
Experiencing a work of art is a private dialogue between the work and 
the viewer, one that excludes other interactions. ‘Art is memory’s mise-­en-­scène’, 
and ‘Art is made by the alone for the alone’, as Cyril Connolly writes in The 
Unquiet Grave.111 Significantly, these are sentences underlined by Luis Barragán 
in his copy of this book of poetry.112 A sense of melancholy lies beneath all 
moving experiences of art; this is the sorrow of beauty’s immaterial temporality. 
Art projects an unattainable ideal, the ideal of beauty that momentarily touches 
the eternal.
Spaces of Scent
We need only eight molecules of substance to trigger an impulse of smell in 
a nerve ending, and we can detect more than 10,000 different odours. The 
most persistent memory of any space is often its smell. I cannot remember the 
appearance of the door to my grandfather’s farmhouse in my early childhood, 
but I do remember the resistance of its weight and the patina of its wood 
surface scarred by decades of use, and I recall especially vividly the scent of 
home in my farmer grandfather’s house, that hit my face as an invisible wall 
behind the door. It was a mixture of the smells of domestic animals, the sweat 
of farm and domestic work, food and meals, and the wood of the all-­wood 
house with all its furniture and objects made of wood. Every dwelling has its 
individual smell of home. Yet, we do not usually sense the smell of our homes, 
as our cells of smell have become used to it. Only when returning home after 
a longer absence, we again sense this specific smell of our home.
A particular smell makes us unknowingly re-­enter a space completely 
forgotten by the retinal memory; the nostrils awaken a forgotten image, and we 
are enticed to enter a vivid daydream. The nose makes the eyes remember. 
‘Memory and imagination remain associated’, as Bachelard writes; ‘I alone in 
my memories of another century, can open the deep cupboard that still retains 
for me alone that unique odour, the odour of raisins, drying on a wicker tray. 
The odour of raisins! It is an odour that is beyond description, one that it takes 
a lot of imagination to smell’.113
What a delight to move from one realm of odour to the next, through 
the narrow streets of an old town! The scent sphere of a candy store makes 
one think of the innocence and curiosity of childhood; the dense smell of 
a shoemaker’s workshop makes one imagine horses, saddles and harness 
straps and the excitement of riding; the fragrance of a bread shop projects 
images of health, sustenance and physical strength, whereas the perfume of 
a pastry shop makes one think of bourgeois felicity. Fishing towns are 
especially memorable because of the fusion of the smells of the sea and of 
the land; the powerful smell of seaweed makes one sense the depth and 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

47
weight of the sea, and it turns any prosaic harbour town into the image of 
the lost Atlantis.
A special joy of travel is to acquaint oneself with the geography and 
microcosm of smells and tastes. Every city has its spectrum of tastes and odours. 
Sales counters on the streets are appetising exhibitions of smells: creatures of 
the ocean that smell of seaweed, vegetables carrying the odour of fertile earth 
and fruits that exude the sweet fragrance of sun and moist summer air. The 
menus displayed outside restaurants make us fantasise the complete course of a 
dinner; letters read by the eyes turn into oral sensations.
Why do abandoned houses always have the same hollow smell: is it 
because the particular smell is stimulated by emptiness observed by the eye? 
Helen Keller was able to recognise ‘an old-­fashioned country house because it 
has several levels of odors, left by a succession of families, of plants, of perfumes 
and draperies’.114
In The Notebooks of Malte Laurids Brigge, Rainer Maria Rilke gives a 
dramatic description of images of past life in an already demolished house, 
conveyed by traces imprinted on the wall of its neighbouring house:
There stood the middays and the sicknesses and the exhaled breath and the smoke 
of years, and the sweat that breaks out under armpits and makes clothes heavy, and 
the stale breath of mouths, and the fusel odour of sweltering feet. There stood the 
tang of urine and the burn of soot and the grey reek of potatoes, and the heavy, 
smooth stench of ageing grease. The sweet, lingering smell of neglected infants was 
there, and the fearsmell of children who go to school, and the sultriness out of the 
beds of nubile youths.115
The retinal images of contemporary architecture certainly appear sterile 
and lifeless when compared with the emotional and associative power of the 
poet’s olfactory imagery. The poet releases the scent and taste concealed in 
words. Through his words a great writer is capable of constructing an entire 
city with all the colours of life. But significant works of architecture also 
project full images of life. In fact, a great architect releases images of ideal life 
concealed in spaces and shapes. Le Corbusier’s sketch of the suspended 
garden for a block of flats, with the wife beating a rug on the upper balcony, 
and the husband hitting a boxing bag below, as well as the fish and the 
electric fan on the kitchen table of the Villa Stein–de Monzie, are examples 
of a rare sense of life in modern images of architecture. Photographs of the 
Melnikov House, on the other hand, reveal a dramatic distance between 
the metaphysical geometry of the iconic house and the traditionally prosaic 
realities of life.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

48
The Shape of Touch
‘[H]ands are a complicated organism, a delta in which life from the most distant 
sources flows together surging into the great current of action. Hands have 
histories; they even have their own culture and their own particular beauty. We 
grant them the right to have their own development, their own wishes, feelings, 
moods and occupations’, writes Rainer Maria Rilke in his essay on Auguste 
Rodin.116 The hands are the sculptor’s eyes; but they are also organs for thought, 
as Heidegger suggests: ‘[the] hand’s essence can never be determined, or 
explained, by its being an organ which can grasp [. . .] Every motion of the 
hand in every one of its works carries itself through the element of thinking, 
every bearing of the hand bears itself in that element [. . .]’.117
The skin reads the texture, weight, density and temperature of matter. The 
surface of an old object, polished to perfection by the tool of the craftsman and 
the assiduous hands of its users, seduces the stroking of the hand. It is pleasurable 
to press a door handle shining from the thousands of hands that have entered 
the door before us; the clean shimmer of ageless wear has turned into an image 
of welcome and hospitality. The door handle is the handshake of the building. 
The tactile sense connects us with time and tradition: through impressions of 
touch we shake the hands of countless generations. A pebble polished by waves 
is pleasurable to the hand, not only because of its soothing shape, but because 
it expresses the slow process of its formation; a perfect pebble on the palm 
materialises duration, it is time turned into shape.
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF  
SHADOW AND DARKNESS
17	 The face is embedded in darkness as 
a precious object on a dark surface 
of velvet.
	
Rembrandt, Self-­Portrait  
(detail), 1660, Musée du  
Louvre, Paris.
18	 The darkness and shadows of 
the Finnish peasant’s house 
create a sense of intimacy 
and silence; light turns into a 
precious gift.
	
The Pertinotsa house from 
the late 19th century in the 
Seurasaari Open-­Air Museum, 
Helsinki.  
Photo: István Rácz
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

49
17
18
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

50
When entering the magnificent outdoor space of Louis Kahn’s Salk 
Institute in La Jolla, California, I felt an irresistible temptation to walk directly 
to the concrete wall and touch the velvety smoothness and temperature of its 
skin. I have later learned the architect’s specification for the surface and 
colour of the concrete: ‘The matt gray of the wings of the moth’. Our skin 
traces temperature spaces with unerring precision; the cool and invigorating 
shadow under a tree, or the caressing sphere of warmth in a spot of sun, turn 
into experiences of space and place. In my childhood images of the Finnish 
countryside, I can vividly recall walls against the angle of the sun, walls which 
multiplied the heat of radiation and melted the snow, allowing the first smell 
of pregnant soil to announce the approach of summer. These early pockets of 
spring were identified by the skin and the nose as much as by the eye.
Gravity is measured by the bottom of the foot; we trace the density and 
texture of the ground through our soles. Standing barefoot on a smooth glacial 
rock by the sea at sunset and sensing the warmth of the sun-­heated stone 
through one’s soles is an extraordinarily healing experience, making one part 
of the eternal cycle of nature. One senses the slow breathing of the earth.
‘In our houses we have nooks and corners in which we like to curl up 
comfortably. To curl up belongs to the phenomenology of the verb to inhabit, and 
only those who have learned to do so can inhabit with intensity’, writes Bachelard.118 
‘And always, in our daydreams, the house is a large cradle’, he continues.119
There is a strong identity between naked skin and the sensation of home. 
The experience of home is essentially an experience of intimate warmth. The 
space of warmth around a fireplace is the space of ultimate intimacy and comfort. 
Marcel Proust gives a poetic description of such a fireside space, as sensed by the 
skin: ‘It is like an immaterial alcove, a warm cave carved into the room itself, a 
zone of hot weather with floating boundaries’.120 Antonio Gaudi’s fireplace in 
Casa Battló in Barcelona is an alcove of warmth, which one enters and occupies.
A sense of homecoming has never been stronger for me than when seeing 
a light in the window of my childhood house in a snow-­covered landscape at 
dusk, the memory of the warm interior already gently warming my frozen 
limbs. ‘A light in the window is a waiting light’, Bachelard writes.121 Home and 
the pleasure of the skin turn into a singular sensation.
The Taste of Stone
In his writings, Adrian Stokes was particularly sensitive to the realms of tactile 
and oral sensations: ‘In employing smooth and rough as generic terms of 
architectural dichotomy I am better able to preserve both the oral and the 
tactile notions that underlie the visual. There is a hunger of the eyes, and 
doubtless there has been some permeation of the visual sense, as of touch, by 
the once all-­embracing oral impulse’.122 Stokes writes also about the ‘oral 
invitation of Veronese marble’,123 and he quotes a letter of John Ruskin: ‘I 
should like to eat up this Verona touch by touch’.124
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

51
There is a subtle transference between tactile and taste experiences. 
Vision becomes transferred to taste as well; certain colours and delicate 
details evoke oral sensations. A delicately coloured polished stone surface is 
subliminally sensed by the tongue. Our sensory experience of the world 
originates in the interior sensation of the mouth, and the world tends to 
return to its oral origins. The most archaic origin of architectural space is in 
the cavity of the mouth, through which the infant first experiences the world.
Many years ago, when visiting the DL James House in Carmel, California, 
designed by Charles and Henry Greene, I felt compelled to kneel and touch the 
delicately shining white marble threshold of the front door with my tongue. The 
sensuous materials and skilfully crafted details of Carlo Scarpa’s architecture as 
well as the sensuous colours of Luis Barragán’s houses frequently evoke oral 
experiences. Deliciously coloured surfaces of stucco lustro, a highly polished colour 
or wood surfaces also present themselves to the appreciation of the tongue.
Jun’ichirō Tanizaki describes impressively the spatial qualities of the sense 
of taste, and the subtle interaction of the senses in the simple act of uncovering 
a bowl of soup:
With lacquerware there is a beauty in that moment between removing the lid and 
lifting the bowl to the mouth when one gazes at the still, silent liquid in the dark 
depths of the bowl, its colour hardly differing from the bowl itself. What lies within 
the darkness one cannot distinguish, but the palm senses the gentle movements of 
the liquid, vapor rises from within forming droplets on the rim, and a fragrance 
carried upon the vapour brings a delicate anticipation. [. . .] A moment of mystery, 
it might almost be called, a moment of trance.125
A fine architectural space opens up and presents itself with the same 
fullness of experience as Tanizaki’s bowl of soup. Architectural experience 
brings the world into a most intimate contact with the body.
Images of Muscle and Bone
As a bird building its nests, primitive man used his own body as the dimensioning 
and proportioning system of his constructions. The essential skills of making a 
living in traditional cultures are based on the wisdom of the body stored in the 
haptic memory. The essential knowledge and skill of the ancient hunter, 
fisherman and farmer, as well as of the mason and stone cutter, was an imitation 
of an embodied tradition of the trade, stored in the muscular and tactile senses. 
Skill was learned through incorporating the sequence of movements refined by 
tradition, not through words or theory.
The body knows and remembers. Architectural meaning derives from 
archaic responses and reactions remembered by the body and the senses. 
Architecture has to respond to traits of primordial behaviour preserved and 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

52
passed down by the genes. It does not only respond to the functional and 
conscious intellectual and social needs of today’s city dweller; it must also 
remember the primordial hunter and farmer concealed in the human body. 
Our sensations of comfort, protection and home are rooted in the primordial 
experiences of countless generations. Bachelard calls these ‘images that bring 
out the primitiveness in us’, or ‘primal images’.126 He writes of the strength of 
the bodily memory:
[T]he house we were born in has engraved within us the hierarchy of the various 
functions of inhabiting. We are the diagram of the functions of inhabiting that 
particular house, and all the other houses are but variations on a fundamental 
theme. The word habit is too worn a word to express this passionate liaison of our 
bodies, which do not forget, with an unforgettable house.127
Modern architecture has had its own conscience in recognising a bias 
towards the visual nature of designs. ‘Architecture of the exterior seems to have 
interested architects of the avant-­garde at the expense of architecture of the 
interior. As if a house were to be conceived for the pleasure of the eye rather 
than for the wellbeing of the inhabitants’, writes Eileen Gray,128 whose design 
approach seems to grow from a study of the minute situations of daily life 
rather than visual and compositional preconceptions.
VISION AND HAPTICITY
19	 A tactile ingredient is  
concealed in vision.
	
Bronze figure from Mongolia,  
15th century, State Public  
Library, Ulan Bator, Mongolia. 
The Buddhist goddess Tara 
possesses five additional eyes, on the 
forehead and in her hands and feet. 
These are considered as signs of 
enlightenment.
20	 The door pull is the handshake 
of a building, which can be 
inviting and courteous, or 
forbidding and aggressive.
	
Alvar Aalto, The Iron House, 
Helsinki, 1954: door pulls. 
Photo: Heikki Havas
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

53
19
20
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

54
Architecture cannot, however, become an instrument of mere functionality, 
bodily comfort and sensory pleasure without losing its existentially mediating 
task. A distinct sense of distance, resistance and tension has to be maintained in 
relation to programme, function and comfort. A piece of architecture should not 
become transparent in its utilitarian and rational motives; it has to maintain its 
impenetrable secret and mystery in order to ignite our imagination and emotions.
Tadao Ando has expressed a desire for a tension or opposition between 
functionality and uselessness in his work: ‘I believe in removing architecture 
from function after ensuring the observation of functional basis. In other 
words, I like to see how far architecture can pursue function and then, after the 
pursuit has been made, to see how far architecture can be removed from 
function. The significance of architecture is found in the distance between it 
and function’.129
Images of Action
Stepping stones set in the grass of a garden are images and imprints of footsteps. 
As we open a door, the body weight meets the weight of the door; the legs 
measure the steps as we ascend a stairway, the hand strokes the handrail and the 
entire body moves diagonally and dramatically through space.
There is an inherent suggestion of action in images of architecture, the 
moment of active encounter, or a ‘promise of function’130 and purpose. ‘The 
objects which surround my body reflect its possible action upon them’, writes 
Henri Bergson.131 It is this possibility of action that separates architecture from 
other forms of art. As a consequence of this implied action, a bodily reaction is 
an inseparable aspect of the experience of architecture. A meaningful architectural 
experience is not simply a series of retinal images. The ‘elements’ of architecture 
are not visual units or Gestalt; they are encounters, confrontations that interact 
with expectations and memory. ‘In such memory, the past is embodied in actions. 
Rather than being contained separately somewhere in the mind or brain, it is 
actively an ingredient in the very bodily movements that accomplish a particular 
action’, Edward Casey writes of the interplay of memory and actions.132
The experience of home is structured by distinct activities – cooking, 
eating, socialising, reading, storing, sleeping and intimate acts – not by visual 
elements. A building is encountered; it is approached, confronted, related to 
one’s body, moved around and through and utilised as a condition for other 
things. Architecture initiates, directs and organises behaviour and movement. 
A building is not an end in itself; it frames, articulates, structures, gives 
significance, relates, separates and unites, facilitates and prohibits. 
Consequently, basic architectural experiences have a verb form rather than 
being nouns. Authentic architectural experiences consist then, for instance, 
of approaching or confronting a building, rather than the formal 
apprehension of a facade; of the act of entering, and not simply the visual 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

55
design of the door; of looking in or out through a window, rather than the 
window itself as a material object; or of occupying the sphere of warmth, 
rather than the fireplace as an object of visual design. Architectural space is 
lived space rather than physical space, and lived space always transcends 
geometry and measurability.
In his analysis of Fra Angelico’s Annunciation in the charming essay ‘From 
the Doorstep to the Common Room’ (1926), Alvar Aalto recognises the verb-­
essence of architectural experience by speaking of the act of entering the room, 
not of the formal design of the porch or the door.133
Modern architectural theory and critique have had a strong tendency to 
regard space as an immaterial object delineated by material surfaces, instead of 
understanding space in terms of dynamic interactions and interrelations. In 
many books on architectural theory an architectural space, say the interior 
space of St Peter’s in Rome, is presented as a positive material cast of the void 
of the space. A void and a material volume are experientially totally exclusive. 
Japanese thinking, however, is founded on a relational understanding of the 
concept of space. In recognition of the verb-­essence of the architectural 
experience, Professor Fred Thompson uses the notions of ‘spacing’ instead of 
‘space’, and of ‘timing’ instead of ‘time’, in his essay on the concept of Ma, and 
the unity of space and time in Japanese thinking.134 He aptly describes units of 
architectural experience with gerunds, or verb-­nouns.
Bodily Identification
The authenticity of architectural experience is grounded in the tectonic 
language of building and the comprehensibility of the act of construction to 
the senses. We behold, touch, listen and measure the world with our entire 
bodily existence, and the experiential world becomes organised and articulated 
around the centre of the body. Our domicile is the refuge of our body, memory 
and identity. We are in constant dialogue and interaction with the environment, 
to the degree that it is impossible to detach the image of the self from its spatial 
and situational existence. ‘I am my body’, Gabriel Marcel claims,135 but ‘I am 
the space, where I am’, establishes the poet Noël Arnaud.136
Henry Moore writes perceptively of the necessity of bodily identification 
in the making of sculpture:
This is what the sculptor must do. He must strive continually to think of, and use, 
form in its full spatial completeness. He gets the solid shape, as it were, inside his 
head – he thinks of it, whatever its size, as if he were holding it completely enclosed 
in the hollow of his hand. He mentally visualizes a complex form from all round 
itself; he knows while he looks at one side what the other side is like; he identifies 
himself with its centre of gravity, its mass, its weight; he realizes its volume, and the 
space that the shape displaces in the air.137
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

56
The encounter of any work of art implies a bodily interaction. The painter 
Graham Sutherland expresses this view on the artist’s work: ‘In a sense the 
landscape painter must almost look at the landscape as if it were himself – 
himself as a human being’.138 In Cézanne’s view, ‘the landscape thinks itself in 
me, and I am its consciousness’.139 A work of art functions as another person, 
with whom one unconsciously converses. When confronting a work of art, we 
project our emotions and feelings onto the work. A curious exchange takes 
place; we lend the work our emotions, whereas the work lends us its authority, 
aura and enigma. Eventually, we meet ourselves in the work. Melanie Klein’s 
notion of ‘projective identification’ suggests that, in fact, all human interaction 
implies projection of fragments of the self onto the other person.140
Mimesis of the Body
A great musician plays himself rather than the instrument, and a skilful soccer 
player plays the entity of himself, the other players and the internalised and 
embodied field, instead of merely kicking the ball. ‘The player understands 
where the goal is in a way which is lived rather than known. The mind does 
not inhabit the playing field but the field is inhabited by a “knowing” body’, 
writes Richard Lang when commenting on Merleau-­Ponty’s views on the 
skills of playing soccer.141
Similarly, during the design process, the architect gradually internalises 
the landscape, the entire context, and the functional requirements as well as 
his/her conceived building: movement, balance and scale are felt unconsciously 
PERIPHERAL VISION AND A  
SENSE OF INTERIORITY
21	 The forest enfolds us in its 
multisensory embrace. The 
multiplicity of peripheral  
stimuli effectively pulls us into  
the reality of its space.
	
Finnish pine forest in the  
vicinity of Alvar Aalto’s Villa  
Mairea, Noormarkku.  
Photo: Rauno Träskelin
22	 The scale and painterly 
technique of American 
Expressionist painters provide 
peripheral stimuli and invite 
us into the space
	
Jackson Pollock, One: Number 
31, 1950 (detail), 1950, 
Museum of Modern Art, 
New York.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

57
21
22
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

58
through the body as tensions in the muscular system and in the positions of the 
skeleton and inner organs. Even as a rough preliminary sketch, the projected 
building is imaginatively experienced as part of the existential life world, not as 
an isolated abstraction. As the work interacts with the body of the observer, the 
experience mirrors the bodily sensations of the maker. Consequently, 
architecture is communication from the body of the architect directly to the 
body of the person who encounters the work, perhaps centuries later.
Understanding architectural scale implies the unconscious measuring of 
the object or the building with one’s body, and of projecting one’s body scheme 
into the place and space in question. We feel pleasure and protection when the 
body discovers its resonance in space. When experiencing a structure, we 
unconsciously mimic its configuration with our bones and muscles: also, the 
pleasurably animated flow of a piece of music is subconsciously transformed 
into bodily sensations, the composition of an abstract painting is experienced 
as tensions in the muscular system, and the structures of a building are 
unconsciously imitated and comprehended through the skeletal system. 
Unknowingly, we perform the task of the column or of the vault with our 
body. ‘The brick wants to become an arch’, as Louis Kahn said, and this 
metamorphosis takes place through the mimetic capacity of the body.142
The sense of gravity is the essence of all architectonic structures, and great 
architecture makes us aware of gravity and earth; architecture may re-­enforce 
the sense of weight or make the material float or soar. Architecture arises from 
horizontality, but it strengthens the experience of the vertical dimension of the 
LIFE-­ENHANCING ARCHITECTURE  
OF THE SENSES
23	 An architecture of formal  
restraint with a rare sensuous 
richness addressing all the senses 
simultaneously.
	
Peter Zumthor, Thermal  
Baths, Vals, Graubünden,  
Switzerland, 1990–6.  
Photo: Hélène Binet
24	 An architecture that addresses  
our sense of movement and  
touch as much as the eye,  
and creates an ambience of 
domesticity and welcome.
	
Alvar Aalto, Villa Mairea, 
Noormarkku, 1938–9: entry hall, 
living room and main staircase.  
Photo: Rauno Träskelin
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

59
23
24
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

60
world. At the same time as making us aware of the depth of the earth, it makes 
us dream of levitation and flight.
Spaces of Memory and Imagination
We have an innate capacity for remembering and imagining places. The 
philosophers of classical Greece already understood the grounding significance 
of place. ‘Everything in the human world is placed’.143 Perception, memory and 
imagination are in constant interaction; the domain of presence fuses into 
images of memory and fantasy. We keep constructing an immense city of 
evocation and remembrance, and all the cities we have visited are precincts in 
this metropolis of the mind.
Literature and cinema would be devoid of their power of enchantment 
without our capacity to enter a remembered or imagined place. The spaces and 
places enticed by a work of art are real in the full sense of the experience. 
‘Tintoretto did not choose that yellow rift in the sky above Golgotha to signify 
anguish or to provoke it. It is anguish and yellow sky at the same time. Not sky 
of anguish or anguished sky; it is an anguish become thing, anguish which has 
turned into yellow-­rift of sky’, writes Sartre of the painter’s ‘Golgotha’.144 
Similarly, the architecture of Michelangelo does not present symbols of 
melancholy; his buildings actually mourn. When experiencing a work of art, a 
curious exchange takes place; the work projects its aura, and we project our own 
emotions and perceptions onto the work. The melancholy in Michelangelo’s 
architecture is fundamentally the viewer’s sense of his/her own melancholy 
enticed by the authority of the art work. Enigmatically, we encounter ourselves 
in the work; we are moved by our own associations and emotions.
Memory takes us back to distant cities, and novels transport us through 
cities invoked by the magic of the writer’s word. The rooms, squares and streets 
of a great writer are as vivid as any that we have visited; the invisible cities of 
Italo Calvino have forever enriched the urban geography of the world. The city 
of San Francisco unfolds in its multiplicity through the montage of Hitchcock’s 
Vertigo; we enter the haunting edifices in the steps of the protagonist and see 
them through his eyes. We become citizens of mid-­19th-­century St Petersburg 
through the incantations of Dostoyevsky. We are in the room of Raskolnikov’s 
shocking double murder, we are among the terrified spectators watching 
Mikolka and his drunken friends beat a horse to death in the street, frustrated 
by our inability to prevent the insane and purposeless cruelty.
The cities of filmmakers, built up of momentary fragments, envelop us 
with the full vigour of real cities. The streets in great paintings continue around 
corners and past the edges of the picture frame into the invisible with all the 
intricacies of life. ‘[The painter] makes [houses], that is, he creates an imaginary 
house on the canvas and not a sign of a house. And the house which thus 
appears preserves all the ambiguity of real houses’, writes Sartre.145
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

61
There are cities that remain mere distant visual images when remembered, 
and cities that are remembered in all their vivacity. The memory re-­evokes the 
delightful city with all its sounds and smells and variations of light and shade. I 
can even choose whether to walk on the sunny side or the shaded side of the 
street in the pleasurable city of my remembrance. The real measure of the 
qualities of a city is whether one can imagine falling in love in it.
An Architecture of the Senses
Various architectures can be distinguished on the basis of the sense modality 
they tend to emphasise. Alongside the prevailing architecture of the eye, there 
is a haptic architecture of the muscle and the skin. There is architecture that 
also recognises the realms of hearing, smell and taste.
The architectures of Le Corbusier and Richard Meier, for instance, clearly 
favour sight, either as a frontal encounter, or the kinaesthetic eye of the 
promenade architecturale (even if the later works of Le Corbusier incorporate 
strong tactile experiences in the forceful presence of materiality and weight). 
On the other hand, the architecture of the Expressionist orientation, beginning 
with Erich Mendelsohn and Hans Scharoun, favours muscular and haptic 
plasticity as a consequence of the suppression of ocular perspectival dominance. 
Frank Lloyd Wright’s and Alvar Aalto’s architectures are based on a full 
recognition of the embodied human condition and of the multitude of 
instinctual reactions hidden in the human unconscious. In today’s architecture, 
the multitude of sensory experiences is heightened in the work of Glenn 
Murcutt, Steven Holl and Peter Zumthor, for instance.
Alvar Aalto was consciously concerned with all the senses in his 
architecture. His comment on the sensory intentions in his furniture design 
clearly reveals this concern: ‘A piece of furniture that forms a part of a person’s 
daily habitat should not cause excessive glare from light reflection: ditto, it 
should not be disadvantageous in terms of sound, sound absorption, etc. A 
piece that comes into the most intimate contact with man, as a chair does, 
shouldn’t be constructed of materials that are excessively good conductors of 
heat’.146 Aalto was clearly more interested in the encounter of the object and 
the body of the user than in mere visual aesthetics.
Aalto’s architecture exhibits a muscular and haptic presence. It incorporates 
dislocations, skew confrontations, irregularities and polyrhythms in order to 
arouse bodily, muscular and haptic experiences. His elaborate surface textures 
and details, crafted for the hand, invite the sense of touch and create an 
atmosphere of intimacy and warmth; this architecture approaches you as an 
individual, as if it had been conceived for you alone. Instead of the disembodied 
Cartesian idealism of the architecture of the eye, Aalto’s architecture is based on 
sensory realism. His buildings are not based on a single dominant concept or 
Gestalt; rather, they are sensory agglomerations. They sometimes even appear 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

62
clumsy and unresolved as drawings, but they are conceived to be appreciated in 
their actual physical and spatial encounter, ‘in the flesh’ of the lived world, not 
as constructions of idealised vision.
The Task of Architecture
The timeless task of architecture is to create embodied and lived existential 
metaphors that concretise and structure our being in the world. Architecture 
reflects, materialises and eternalises ideas and images of ideal life. Buildings and 
towns enable us to structure, understand and remember the shapeless flow of 
reality and, ultimately, to recognise and remember who we are. Architecture 
enables us to perceive and understand the dialectics of permanence and change, 
past and present, to settle ourselves in the world, and to place ourselves in the 
continuum of culture and time.
In its way of representing and structuring action and power, societal and 
cultural order, interaction and separation, identity and memory, architecture is 
engaged with fundamental existential questions. All experience implies the acts 
of recollecting, remembering and comparing. An embodied memory has an 
essential role as the basis of remembering a space or a place. We transfer all the 
cities and towns that we have visited, all the places that we have recognised, 
into the incarnate memory of our body. Our domicile becomes integrated 
with our self-­identity; it becomes part of our own body and being.
In memorable experiences of architecture, place, matter and time fuse 
into one singular dimension, into the basic substance of being, the existential 
experience, that penetrates our consciousness. We identify ourselves with this 
space, this place and this moment, and these dimensions become ingredients of 
our very existence. Architecture is the art of reconciliation between ourselves 
and the world, and this mediation takes place through the senses.
In 1954, at the age of 85, Frank Lloyd Wright formulated the mental task 
of architecture in the following words:
What is needed most in architecture today is the very thing that is most needed in 
life – Integrity. Just as it is in a human being, so integrity is the deepest quality in a 
building [.  .  .] If we succeed, we will have done a great service to our moral 
nature – the psyche – of our democratic society [. . .] Stand up for integrity in your 
building and you stand for integrity not only in the life of those who did the build-
ing, but socially a reciprocal relationship is inevitable.147
This emphatic declaration of architecture’s mission is even more urgent 
today than at the time of its writing seven decades ago. And this view calls for 
a full understanding of the human condition.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the Senses, Fourth Edition. Juhani Pallasmaa.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
A DOOR HANDLE,  
A HANDSHAKE
AN INTRODUCTION TO  
JUHANI PALLASMAA  
AND HIS WORK
PETER 
MACKEITH
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

65
In much the same way that a door handle is the ‘handshake’ of a building, 
this book provides an opportunity to shake the hand of the Finnish 
architect, educator and author Juhani Pallasmaa  – even to share a few 
moments in his company. The Eyes of the Skin is very much a book for the 
hand; like its author, the book’s narrative has an intimate grasp, gently 
encouraging your curiosity. The qualities of warmth, intelligence, generosity, 
courtesy and inspiration in the author’s voice emerge rapidly and reward 
your engagement.
As a designer, Pallasmaa has given great attention to the design and 
fabrication of door handles. Similar to his predecessors in the Nordic 
architectural culture, among them Eliel Saarinen (1873–1950), Erik Gunnar 
Asplund (1885–1940), Arne Jacobsen (1902–1971) and Alvar Aalto (1898–
1976), the door handle possesses talismanic significance for the architect and is 
a primary detail to be explored, refined and crafted. Pages of Pallasmaa’s 
sketchbooks depict multiple, obsessive design iterations of a lever handle, for 
instance, and a cast bronze, gently-curved vertical door pull installed in his 
home city of Helsinki contains all the elements, formal principles and ambitions 
of an entire building commission. The anthropomorphic analogy to The Eyes 
of the Skin is intensely appropriate: in the book’s clear structure, intellectual 
density, precise articulation, humane sensitivity and profound meaning, there 
can be discerned the character of the author.
The equivalence between a designed door handle and a published book 
is emblematic, for Pallasmaa’s life and work more generally highlights the 
complementary relationship between “thinking” and “making”, between the 
act of writing on architecture and the act of designing and constructing 
architecture. Although Pallasmaa describes his trajectory into education and his 
work as an essayist and critic as a “slow, unintentional drift”, parallel to his work 
as an architect, he is quite resolute about his critical perspective and his writing 
process – as a practising architect, exploring ideas:
‘I write about art, architecture and the life world as a practicing architect and 
designer who is also engaged in the realm of the arts. I write in the same manner 
and with the same intentions as I sketch and draw, open mindedly and without 
preconceptions or pre-set ideas. The words arise in the same manner as the lines of 
a drawing unfold, semi-automatically, revealing an image that has been hiding 
somewhere in the folds of thoughts, associations and embodied memories. Both the 
drawing and the sentence seek to give a shape to an emergent feeling, a shapeless 
complex of uncertainty and intuitive assurance that acquires intentionality and 
meaning at the moment of its very emergence. As a consequence of my way of 
working, a design and an essay are the same thing for me, yet they seem to be caus-
ally unrelated and exist in different realities, as two parallel but independent prod-
ucts or observations of the mind’.1
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

66
2.  Juhani Pallasmaa at the age of seventy 
five. Photo: Knut Thyberg.
The Eyes of the Skin thus has this tangible architectural intentionality 
behind it. First published in 1996, the book was produced in a second edition 
in 2005, a third edition in 2012, and is now being re-issued again in this fourth 
edition, in both print and digital versions. Indeed, you may in fact hold in your 
hands a digital reader, having only seconds ago downloaded the digital file to 
your LED screen. Ironically, at one point after The Eyes of the Skin’s first printing 
had sold through, the book circulated in seemingly endless photocopied 
versions, each a paler reflection of its samizdat predecessor. But no matter, 
neither form of contemporary technological reproduction can obscure the fact 
that this is still a book, written, designed and scaled for your hands as much as 
for your eyes. Indeed, this is a book originally, laboriously and intentionally 
written by hand, through many manuscript drafts and revisions, as Pallasmaa 
describes: ‘I . . . write in the same way as I design, through eight to ten 
successive long-hand manuscripts, or hand-made corrections, that my secretary 
types and hands back to me for further additions and corrections. I need to see 
my own, almost illegible handwriting on the paper in order to feel an intimacy 
and internalization with the text. I also appreciate the signs and traces of work’.2
Read the book’s relatively few pages then with this manual sensibility, as 
a material, tangible, even sensual, condensation of thought and feeling – and 
time. For no matter the swiftness of your acquisition of the book, and despite 
the book’s brevity (you might finish its xx pages in an hour), like all works of 
1.  Juhani Pallasmaa at the age of four on 
his farmer grandfather’s horse-drawn 
mower, manufactured in the mid-1930s. 
Photographer unknown.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

67
literary ambition, The Eyes of the Skin absolutely intends to hold your attention 
and slow your sense of time and experience as you turn the pages. You may find 
yourself, as many have, subsequently returning to it again and again, extending 
the book’s actual duration well past the moment you first turned the last page.
This depth and duration is layered intellectually, historically and culturally. 
In shaking Pallasmaa’s hand, in The Eyes of the Skin, you also encounter his 
friends and mentors  – and this, it must be said, is a long line of diverse 
companions. Be prepared for some depth and disorientation here, too: he’s 
fond of quoting Aldo van Eyck’s assertion that his own conversation with both 
Cezanne and Giotto was ongoing, even if the painters had passed away 
hundreds of years ago! In Pallasmaa’s view, ‘One’s most important teacher may 
have died half a millennium ago; one’s true mentor could well be Filippo 
Brunelleschi or Piero della Francesca. I believe that every serious artist – at the 
edge of his/her consciousness – addresses and offers his/her work to a superior 
colleague for approval. If you feel that your work is approved by Filippo or 
Piero, or, for instance, it cannot be entirely worthless’.3
Unquestionably, in this vein, The Eyes of the Skin has both its antecedents 
and companions in Nordic architectural thinking; these are well worth 
considering. Asplund and Aalto’s fascination with the tactile and telling detail has 
been mentioned, but for Pallasmaa, Aalto’s depiction of Asplund (in a 
1940 memorial for the Swedish architect) as the modern architect who uncovered 
and insisted on architecture’s ‘psychological’ character is just as important. 
Pallasmaa also identifies Aalto’s prescient observation on the need for modern 
architecture to address human, psychological qualities: ‘. . .the fault is that the 
rationalization has not gone deep enough. Instead of resisting the rationalist 
approach, the latest phase of modern architecture is trying to channel rational 
methods away from the technical sphere and into that of humanism and 
3.  Sketches for door pulls, 
early 1990s. Page in a sketch 
book.
4.  Prototypes for door handles, 1991. The set of twenty 
variations was produced for Pallasmaa´s exhibition in 
the Finland Pavilion at the Venice Biennale in 1991.
Source: From Rauno Träskelin.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

68
psychology’.4 The Danish professor Steen Eiler Rasmussen’s elegant Experiencing 
Architecture, published in 1959, is a progenitor in the assertion of architecture’s 
sensory qualities.5 The presence of Pallasmaa’s direct Finnish mentors, Aulis 
Blomstedt and Aarno Ruusuvuori, can be sensed in the book’s demanding 
insistence on a probity for architecture. Sigurd Lewerentz (1885–1975), 
Asplund’s former collaborator, also has an intriguing role in the book’s DNA, 
by virtue of his late works of the 1960s, the singular, evocative brick-constructed 
churches of St Peter and St Mark in Klippan and Bjorkhagen, Sweden.6 The 
Norwegian academic Christian Norberg-Schulz emphasized existential and 
phenomenological issues  – “an ontology of place”, drawing heavily upon 
Martin Heidegger’s philosophical reflections  – in examining architecture’s 
history and possibilities through a series of books and essays written primarily 
in the 1970s and 1980s; Pallasmaa’s thinking in The Eyes of the Skin animates 
and specifies Norberg-Schulz’s studies.7 And as importantly in the Nordic 
fraternity, Sverre Fehn’s poetic works (1924–2009), thoughts and character – so 
brilliantly condensed by Per Olaf Fjeld in The Thought of Construction (1984) – 
parallel Pallasmaa’s own emergence in the same decade.8
But to position the book solely in a Nordic architectural and intellectual 
lineage is to sequester it unfairly as a ‘regionalist’ outlook, simply an expression 
borne of Ultima Thule. Pallasmaa is too well-read, well-travelled and 
well-acquainted to be so simply defined. The book is also an implicit 
introduction to two significant British architects and educators, Colin St John 
Wilson (1922–2007) and Kenneth Frampton (b 1930), both close friends of 
Pallasmaa, each with their affinities for Finnish and Nordic architecture and 
each with their own post-war trajectory of humanist intellectual production 
(and, in Wilson’s case, with significant architectural accomplishments). Wilson, 
the deeply read former Dean of Architecture at Cambridge, maintained a 
lifelong stubborn, sensitive insistence on a philosophical, ethical ground for 
architecture; in parallel, he identified and upheld “the other tradition” of 
modern architecture – championing Aalto, Scharoun, Eileen Gray, Asplund and 
Lewerentz as architects of the 20th century who were never bound by dogmatic 
definitions of function or form.9 As importantly, Wilson introduced Pallasmaa 
to the psychologically grounded writings of the art critic Adrian Stokes.10 
Frampton, as deeply read and influenced by the Frankfurt School of post-war 
political, economic and social thought, became one of the canonical late 
20th-century historians of modern architecture; beginning with a series of 
seminal essays in the early 1980s, he set out an agenda for an architecture of 
‘critical regionalism’, in which the work of Aalto, Jorn Utzon (1918–2008), 
Fehn and others across the globe demonstrated site- and culture-specificity.11 
For Pallasmaa, already engaged in conversations with Wilson and Frampton by 
the late 1970s and throughout the 1980s, these perspectives proved deeply 
affective and influential.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

69
Intertwined amongst this intellectual development and sourcing is an 
equally strong set of North American voices. The long-time Dean of the 
Cooper Union School of Architecture, John Hejduk (1929–2000), had 
befriended Pallasmaa already in the late 1970s – along with supporting Sverre 
Fehn – and their shared understanding was of a poetic imperative for architecture. 
To similar effect, a young Daniel Libeskind had welcomed Pallasmaa to the 
Architecture Studio at the Cranbrook Academy during his leadership 
tenure there; the two began a correspondence, an exchange of drawings and 
exhibitions, and a mutually supportive personal and professional relationship. 
Importantly, Pallasmaa credits Libeskind with introducing him to Gaston 
Bachelard’s book The Poetics of Space – a transformative moment, as Pallasmaa 
acknowledges.12
As Pallasmaa’s own introduction makes clear, the direct origins of The 
Eyes of the Skin lie in the mutuality of ideas, perspectives and approaches 
initiated and shared in the early 1990s between the American architect and 
educator Steven Holl, the Mexican-Canadian academic Alberto Pėrez-Gómez 
(first resident at Carleton University and then at McGill University in Canada) 
and Pallasmaa. All three were drawn together, in thought and practice, by their 
ambitions to ground architecture in a phenomenological approach, in a quietly 
dramatic counterpoint to the prevailing dictates of architecture culture at the 
time – the eclipse of Euclidean geometry, for instance, or the de-centring of 
the human subject, or the undecidability of meaning.
From their first meeting at the 1991 Alvar Aalto Symposium in Finland, 
Holl and Pallasmaa had immediately shared such common perspectives. The 
two had further bonded in succeeding years as Holl was awarded through 
competition the commission for Museum of Contemporary Art in Helsinki, 
the building now known by its competition motto Kiasma (the word itself 
a Fennicised spelling of a Merleau-Ponty concept).13 Pallasmaa would assist 
Holl’s commission in Finland as associate architect and would contribute to 
the site planning and public space design of the building. Perez-Gomez, no 
less, through his seminal work Architecture and the Crisis of Modern Science 
and subsequent publications, pursued similar intensely researched and 
deeply felt agendas; Pallasmaa was a regular contributor to and participant 
in Perez-Gomez’ doctoral program in architectural history and theory 
at McGill.14
In this phenomenological grounding, the works of the 20th-century 
French philosophes Gaston Bachelard and Maurice Merleau-Ponty figure 
prominently (along with the more sheerly poetic inspirations of Rainer Maria 
Rilke, Joseph Brodsky and Jorge Luis Borges).15 Pallasmaa acknowledges his 
clear debts to both Bachelard and Merleau-Ponty in his writings and lectures, 
declaring Bachelard’s writings “a kind of lodestone” and Merleau-Ponty’s 
perspectives “inspiringly open-ended and optimistic”.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

70
Despite this layered heritage, The Eyes of the Skin was first envisioned as a 
singular intellectual and deeply felt essay, but has since engendered two further, 
related volumes, The Thinking Hand and The Embodied Image.16 While you 
might be drawn towards these essays by this first reading, the book can 
nonetheless be read entirely on its own. Entirely on its own, provided you are 
also willing to enter the fantastic library of extended references the book both 
names and suggests, as well as the larger world of artistic works and architectural 
locations it specifies and evokes. Indeed, the selected images and extensive 
endnotes of the book are merely a pale reflection of the immense personal 
library of references from which Pallasmaa draws.
That library, in fact, is a real space – for many who visit with Pallasmaa in 
his Helsinki office, it is the central room and the primary space for discussion, 
entertainment and intellectual and visual references. Pallasmaa is a bibliophile, 
as so many architects are, and the bookshelves lining the library have now 
expanded into the entry corridor and as well, into the other office studio 
rooms. There is always a stack of newly acquired books on the library’s main 
table, as well as several other stacks set aside as references for ongoing essays and 
lecture preparation. The cataloguing of the library is a Sisyphean task; it was 
often the introductory task for the newest member of the office staff and 
entailed intense discussions as to cataloguing classification systems. For 
Pallasmaa, as with Thomas Jefferson (the intellectual and amateur architect), his 
library’s shelving required a re-conceptualisation of the order of knowledge: 
‘Until the age of forty, I used to classify my books in two categories: architecture 
books and other books. Then I realized that my first category mostly dealt 
5.  Prototypes for drawer and door pulls, cast 
bronze, 1991.
Source: From Rauno Träskelin.
6.  Door pull and push for the glass 
doors of Marimekko Shop in 
Helsinki. Patinated cast bronze, 1986.
Source: From Rauno Träskelin.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

71
with architecture as an aestheticized formalism, whereas the second category 
posed cities, buildings and settings as integrated with life and human character. 
During the past thirty years, I have all books as architecture book, because all 
human situations, histories, fictions, actions, and thoughts are framed by human 
constructions and artifacts; our spatial, material and mental constructions 
provide essential horizons of understanding. I read poems, listen to music, look 
at paintings, and watch films as potential architectural propositions’.17
But this is not the reflective solitude of Saint Jerome in his library cell. The 
Pallasmaa library has also been the location since 1994 – roughly the time of 
The Eyes of the Skin’s conception and writing – of a conversation group drawn 
from across the intellectual, artistic and cultural life of Finland, including “a 
poet, a cultural historian, a theater director, a composer, a dramaturge, a painter, 
a photographer, and two literary critics. . .”18 Here, too, the inclusiveness is 
telling; Pallasmaa’s desire is to see the interrelationships and layers of knowledge 
and perspective.
Accept The Eyes of the Skin then as an open-handed invitation to this 
library and to this conversation group, as an encouraging hand beckoning and 
pointing towards an expanded territory of history and culture. This, too, is an 
ambition of the book: to situate and ground considerations of architecture 
responsibly (and responsively) within that larger cultural territory and 
simultaneously, to engage you to that larger culture as well. Importantly, this 
is  a  conversation and a reading that needs no translator: as with all his 
commissioned work for primarily English-speaking audiences, Pallasmaa has 
written The Eyes of the Skin in English from the beginning. His fluency is 
second nature, and while the essay’s tone may vary from the analytical to the 
conditional to the declarative, the author’s language is of the first order.
The book may possess another manuality altogether for you. Franz Kafka 
provocatively asserted that: ‘a book must be an ice ax to break the seas frozen 
inside our soul’.19 The author of The Eyes of the Skin might offer a gentler tool 
as a metaphor, perhaps, but one with no less transformative intention, energy, 
or impact. The opening lines of the Finnish epic novel of the 20th century, 
Here Under the Northern Star, sound a parallel, culturally and geographically 
resonant ambition: “In the beginning, there was the swamp, Jussi (the diminutive 
of Juhani) and the hoe”.20 Bear in mind that in writing, Pallasmaa writes with 
the dictate of Milan Kundera in his mind – that a writer writes always to the 
ideal reader, but also always to himself – working therefore with both sincere 
optimism and honest directness.21 This suggests that Pallasmaa works to clarify 
issues of architectural, philosophical and cultural importance for himself – to 
clear and cultivate the swamp, so to speak – with the extended hope that such 
work will be of further sustaining benefit to others.
This emphasis on the exploration and strengthening of self-identity through 
art and architecture is a resounding theme in Pallasmaa’s essays, lecturing, teaching 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

72
and design work. The Eyes of the Skin amplifies this theme through an insistence 
on a fully embodied and sensory architecture.  The search for self-identity, 
however, is not a search for ego-centred self-expression – precisely the opposite. 
A more general imperative – the reconciliatory task of architecture – is also 
outlined as the ultimate poetic, personal and social, responsibility of the architect. 
It is an imperative Pallasmaa has sounded many times, many ways, but the call 
remains constant: ‘Architecture’s task is to articulate and express the essence of 
our lived world and to enable us to dwell in this world’.22
Apertures
Pallasmaa is now 87 years old, and announced his retirement from active design 
practice in 2020 to concentrate his energies on writing, lecturing and teaching. 
For many in the architectural communities of the Nordic countries, and for 
that number of European and North American sympathisers to the Finnish 
architectural cause, he is a representative figure – yet one whose work and 
voice even at this stage paradoxically has not been adequately exhibited and 
heard. The publication and reception since 1996 of The Eyes of the Skin clearly 
have provided increasing academic opportunities, and Pallasmaa has pursued a 
relentless lecturing and teaching schedule far outside Finland for almost three 
decades – at a pace equivalent perhaps only to the legendary touring of Muddy 
Waters, BB King and Chuck Berry (all musicians he admires, by the way, along 
with the jazz greats). But it is a little known, and little-discussed, fact that he sat 
on the Pritzker Prize Jury from 2008 to 2014, part of that time together with 
his good friend, the Australian architect Glenn Murcutt.
In his home country, however, while Pallasmaa is regarded as a 
‘phenomenon’, the sheer amount of productivity and positions of responsibility 
in which he has succeeded in the Finnish architectural culture over the last 
7.  Juhani Pallasmaa with Alberto Perez-Gomez 
and Steven Holl in the latter’s office in 
New York in 1994, at the time of collaboration 
on Questions of Perception.
8.  Library/Conference 
room 
of 
Juhani Pallasmaa Architects, Helsinki. 
The glass table was designed by 
Pallasmaa.
Photo Rauno Träskelin.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

73
sixty years may not offer an adequate explanation. His has been an architectural 
life of fascinating versatility and surprisingly complementary roles, in which 
the strength of his protean intellect has paralleled an intense commitment to 
the making of an intimate architecture.
An existential geometry describing the substance of Pallasmaa’s life might 
well be configured by a circle; a perimeter of circumstances, consistently expanding, 
but always with reference to the central point of his homeland, and to the central 
idea of home. ‘In the visual arts in general and in architecture in particular the basic 
forms dominate: the circle, the square, the triangle, and the basic orientation and 
numbers. The circle, for instance, is a symbol of the self, expressing all the dimensions 
of the psyche, including the man–nature relationships’.23 Home, the point of 
origin,  that intimate inhabitation of house and landscape, functions as both 
psychological foundation and metaphorical description for Pallasmaa’s work and 
thought. Simultaneously, the deep consciousness of his upbringing and culture has 
allowed the architect to move in widening arcs towards a deepening knowledge of 
the world beyond Finland, and towards a more profound understanding of art and 
architecture. An understanding of that circle of circumstances might best be 
framed by a series of apertures opening onto selected biographical moments.
Born in 1936 in pre-war Finland, as a young boy Pallasmaa was sent to his 
maternal grandfather’s farm on the central Finnish plains to be out of harm’s 
way during the long wartime years. Pallasmaa saw his soldiering father perhaps 
only every five or six months; the boy’s grandfather and the vitality of the farm 
centred his life and he came thereby to know the value of simple things:
‘I was the only boy in the entire dispersed village, and I spent my endlessly long 
days inventing pastime activities around the house and in the nearby forests, or 
observing the manifold chores of my aged but wise grand-dad. I admired his 
9.  Chair, prototype, laminated 
plywood and carbon fibre and 
chromed spring steel, 1991. 
Source: From Rauno Träskelin.
10. Adjustable reclining chair, prototype, 1994. 
Laminated plywood and carbon fibre, chromed 
spring steel base, leather head rest.
Source: From Rauno Träskelin.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

74
­diligence, and his multifarious skills and self-assurance; no work seemed insur-
mountable to him . . . I cannot recall anyone ever having been asked: can you 
do this? Mastering everything necessary was considered self-evident in farm 
life. The skills of the farmer were not theoretical knowledge learned through 
reading, but embodied and tacit wisdom, skills learned and remembered by mus-
cles through observation and imitation . . . I can no longer conjure up a clear 
picture of the plank table in my grand-dad’s kitchen (which served as the living 
room), but I can still imagine myself sitting beside it and reliving this focal point 
of a rural cottage, the binding force of our family circle and its occasional 
visitors’.24
The essential experience of this family circle, this home, remains in 
Pallasmaa’s bones:
‘Regardless of having in lived in eight houses, I have had only one experiential 
home in my childhood; my experiential home seems to have travelled with me and 
constantly transformed into new physical shapes as we moved . . . I recall vividly 
the sense of home, the feeling of returning home from a skiing trip in the darkness 
of a cold winter evening. The experience of home is never stronger than when 
seeing the windows of the house lit up in the dark winter landscape and sensing the 
invitation of warmth warming your frozen limbs’.25
11. Adjustable light fitting, 1986. Painted 
steel plate, steel base.
Source: From Rauno Träskelin.
12.  Outdoor light fitting, 1998, for 
Kiasma Museum of Modern Art in 
Helsinki designed by Steven Holl.
Source: From Rauno Träskelin.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

75
Following Finland’s difficult conclusion to the Second World War, the 
family returned to southern Finland and eventually to Helsinki. As Pallasmaa 
recounts, his grandfather’s influence continued in another, clearly artistic 
direction:
‘At the age of fourteen, I inherited my paternal grandfather’s oil painting equip-
ment and quite a lot of oil paints. In the general poverty of the period after the war 
this felt luxurious and certainly strengthened my interest in painting and drawing; 
I had drawn obsessively already as a kid. If I had not known how difficult it was to 
make one’s living as an artist, I could have become a painter . . .’26
As a 17-year-old American Field Service exchange student, Pallasmaa 
ambitiously travelled from Helsinki, first by boat across the Gulf of Finland to 
Stockholm – where he saw a television for the first time in a shop window – 
and then eventually across the Atlantic, to the United States, to the similarly flat 
and frigid landscapes of Minneapolis, to a year in an American high school, 
where he experienced not only the material and spiritual paradox that is 
America, but also won a state championship in cross-country skiing and a 
school prize for dancing the jitterbug. The initial American visit would be the 
first of many, in fact, and indeed, Pallasmaa estimates that he has spent more 
time in the United States than in any other country outside of Finland.
After finishing high school in 1957, Pallasmaa applied for entrance into 
the Faculty of Architecture at the then Helsinki Institute of Technology – still 
located then in a grand neo-classical structure on Hietalahdentori at the 
13.  Moduli 
225 
summer 
house 
system 
designed by Kristian Gullichsen and Juhani 
Pallasmaa, 1968-72. First prototype in Kinkamo.
Photo Kaj Lindholm.
14.  Moduli 
225, 
standard 
joint 
details.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

76
western end of Helsinki’s Bulevardi (the Aalto-designed Otaniemi campus in 
Espoo of what would be the Helsinki University of Technology was under 
construction). In the post-war era, still characterised by economic austerity 
measures, he recalls being mesmerised by the original perspective drawings by 
Eliel Saarinen that adorned the corridor walls of the Faculty:
‘As I was accepted into the Faculty of Architecture in Helsinki in 1957, I felt 
extremely privileged to be permitted entry to a new and different world, the 
world of artistic ideas and beauty. I did not think of my craft as a profession or a 
source of livelihood; I saw architecture as a mental position through which to 
experience the world meaningfully. Looking at Eliel Saarinen’s original drawings 
along one of the corridors of the Faculty of Architecture set a fire in anybody’s 
soul. Learning became a burning desire and in the post-war scarcity fed the 
imagination’.27
As a young graduated architect, fresh from an education gained under the 
tutelage of Finnish rationalists Aulis Blomstedt and Aarno Ruusuvuori in the 
late 1950s and early 1960s, Pallasmaa and his classmates attempted to understand 
their identity and professional role in an architectural culture dominated by the 
‘oak tree’ figure of Alvar Aalto, and in a larger context, in the years surrounding 
the Paris Spring of 1968:
‘There was a strong opposition between those of the “rationalist” school of thought 
and Aalto’s ‘Academy’, but these tensions originated in the generation of Aalto. 
There was also a lot of ideological theater about Aalto’s persona and genius which 
appeared unacceptable in the idealist democratic atmosphere of the 1960s . . . we 
not only had a strong social conscience, we believed in a universal, anonymous, 
international and democratic architecture for everybody. None of us were mem-
bers of any political party, but we projected a politically oriented idealism. We 
believed that architecture held the answer to many social and political problems’.28
The vocal young architect upheld the primacy of rational thought in 
design, emphasising the importance of information and technology, opposing 
the bureaucratic excesses of the state. He would write at the time: ‘Design is 
moving away from individual supervision and intuition to collective 
methodological control, from the design of separate sites to general systems and 
structures, and from immutable and ultimate design to disposable, changing 
and variable design’.29 Architecture, in Pallasmaa’s opinion at the time, was not 
‘a mystical attribute of space, but organization, the arrangement of facts. 
Actually, the word “beautiful” should be replaced by “right”. For then art is the 
skill of doing right’. Such words would subsequently take on altogether 
different meanings. In 1968, at the age of 33, Pallasmaa was elected Rector of 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

77
the Institute of Industrial Arts in Helsinki, elected by the 1300 students 
themselves after a succession of academic disturbances. His first action in this 
position of authority was to speak at a solidarity meeting of students in support 
of striking Finnish steel workers.
Yet in 1972, following his tenure as rector, Pallasmaa departed Finland 
entirely for Africa, in particular, for Ethiopia, where he assumed the 
responsibilities of an associate professor in architecture at the Haile Selassie I 
University in Addis Abeba for two and half years, under the auspices of the 
Finnish development aid program. The period was one of a self-imposed 
political exile and a transforming one for the maturing architect. His idealistic 
belief in the redemptive powers of rationalistic design, technology and building 
standardisation in his home country had already been disillusioned by the 
brutalising takeover of the building process by the Finnish construction 
companies. The control of pre-fabricated production, he observed, resulted in 
a tragic exclusion of quality, of human content, from the urgent needs for 
housing. In Africa, Pallasmaa rediscovered directly the meaning of the social 
content of architecture, as well as the advantage of small-scale modular systems 
in solving architectural commissions under drastically different conditions of 
culture and technology. Given the revolutionary moment in Ethiopia at time, 
the university was often closed; Pallasmaa readily accepted architectural 
commissions, among them an art museum for the university, housing, a 
multipurpose hall for the public health college in Gondar and a leprosy village 
for 150 families. Pallasmaa recalls that when the leprosy village was completed, 
the authorities determined that its quality was too high for the original 
inhabitants and re-purposed it for municipal workers.
The experience catalysed the architect’s understanding of the cultural, 
environmental and psychological elements in his evolving architectural 
philosophy.
‘My experiences in Ethiopia in the early 1970s disillusioned my confidence in 
rationality, in the unquestioned benefits of technology and ideas of universality. 
I became interested in anthropological, structuralist and eventually psychoanalytical 
writings. The writings of Erich Fromm and Herbert Marcuse were particularly 
important, and made me understand the essence of collective psychic phenomena. 
Anton Ehrenzweig’s two books on the unconscious dimensions of artistic creativity 
and experience gave, perhaps, the most important single impulse to my way of 
thinking’.30
Combined with these readings, the African experience struck deep chords 
within Pallasmaa’s consciousness and awakened an awareness of the possible 
role of archetypes, dreams and memories in art and architecture. The intellectual 
and emotional debt to the diverse cultural experiences of the African continent 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

78
is undeniable in his subsequent writings and lectures. At the same time, the 
politicised dimensions of the commissions in Ethiopia were disillusioning for 
the young architect.
The interest in the psychological and the biological bases of spatial perception 
and the visual arts dominated Pallasmaa’s thoughts upon his return to Finland in 
the mid-1970s. As Exhibition Director for the Museum of Finnish Architecture, 
he had ample opportunity to materially clarify the effects of his African experience 
through the design of numerous temporary exhibitions. Subsequently, during a 
five-year term as Director of the Museum, Pallasmaa internationalised the 
Museum’s activities, with displays of work by Tadao Ando, Alvaro y Siza, Daniel 
Libeskind and American architectural drawings in an attempt to broaden the 
cultural outlook of the Museum. The Museum’s yearbook, Abacus, became a 
forum for the examination of national and international architectural issues. His 
own contributions to the yearbook reflected his growing awareness of 
anthropological, linguistic and psychological issues, for example: ‘The deep-
structure meetings unconsciously aroused in the architectural experience are 
memories and associations connected with the synaesthetic mental images of 
early childhood, spatio-kinetic experience and collective archetypes’.31
Pallasmaa left the Museum in 1983, and put these ideas to the test with a 
growing number of independent design projects, beginning with his own 
apartment and continuing through thoroughly detailed designs for Marimekko 
and the Rovaniemi Art Museum. These projects of the 1980s were in many 
ways extensions of the principles worked out in exhibition design. The tactile 
was stressed over the sheerly visual, beginning with door handles, softened 
edges, consideration of materials, surfaces and light, and space was imbued with 
both proportional ordering and material sensibilities. By 1986, on the verge of 
15.  Prototype 
house 
for 
the 
settlement of 150 leprosy families 
in Ambo, Ethiopia. The project 
was designed by Pallasmaa and his 
students at the Haile Sellassie I 
University in Addis Abeba in 
1972–1974. The 
project 
was 
funded by the German Red Cross.
Photo Juhani Pallasmaa.
16.  Project for the Swedish School in Addis 
Abeba by Pallasmaa, 1973.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

79
an intense period of design commissions, Pallasmaa confirmed his shift in 
thinking in quoting Aalto’s well-known statement concerning the depth of 
rationalisation in modern architecture and the new directions of the movement: 
‘. . .the fault is that the rationalization has not gone deep enough. Instead of 
resisting the rationalist approach, the latest phase of modern architecture is 
trying to channel rational methods away from the technical sphere and into 
that of humanism and psychology’. His observation that ‘it seems that Finnish 
architects in general are now engaged in materialising Aalto’s programme of 
expanding a rational attitude to the psychological sphere of design’ was both 
thinly veiled self-observation and a declaration of emergent intentions.32
Indeed, in 1985, Pallasmaa wrote an essay entitled “The Geometry of 
Feeling” for Arkkitehti, the Finnish Architectural Review (The Architectural Review 
would subsequently republish it in its full English-language version).33 As he 
describes it, “only while writing this essay I became aware of phenomenology 
as a line of philosophical enquiry, and I added a short chapter on this 
philosophical approach in my essay”.34 But such a tentative initiative would 
soon expand and deepen.
In the early 1990s, with a growing number of larger-scale commissions 
and a growing office staff, Pallasmaa was appointed first professor (of the Basic 
Course in Architecture) and then Dean of the Faculty of Architecture at 
17. Three pieces of abstracted studies of 
staircases for an installation of 26 
variations, cast in bronze and variously 
patinated, in an exhibition of three 
painters, a composer and an architect at 
the Helsinki City Art Hall, 1998.
Source: From Rauno Träskelin.
18. The grave marker of the atheist father 
of the architect. Cast and patinated bronze, 
1968.
Source: From Rauno Träskelin.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

80
the  Helsinki University of Technology. The academic appointments, while 
gratifying and resonant with the lineage of his mentors Blomstedt and 
Ruusuvuori, more importantly provided a platform from which to reinvigorate 
the theoretical dimension of the architecture curriculum, simultaneously 
attaching these poetic considerations to the material aspects of the building. 
Pallasmaa argued for a reworking of the idea of an architectural education, for 
a radical poetic of architecture, in which theory informs praxis, in which the 
satisfaction of function includes the awareness of the psychological dimensions 
of design, in which orders of material, structure, light and space accumulate 
towards a metaphysical experience. These ambitions for the curriculum and 
the Faculty also were aimed at overcoming the conventional perception of 
Finnish architecture as entirely pragmatic and resistant to theoretical statements 
or written speculations on the nature of architecture. And, too, well aware of 
the currents flowing through architectural education through his many visits to 
other schools, Pallasmaa sought to position the Faculty more prominently in 
the larger world of architectural education – but by deepening its Finnish identity.
Throughout these years, while elsewhere in the architectural world 
debates centred on a ‘post-modern’ architecture constituted by a superficial 
historicism or an equally superficial ‘deconstructivism’ in architecture, Pallasmaa 
consistently argued in his published writings and in public forums for an 
alternative reinvigoration of the philosophy and practice of the discipline. 
Such perspectives and essays found an initial international audience through 
the support of the British journal The Architectural Review and its long-time 
editor, Peter Davey, himself a great friend to Finnish architecture and a vigorous 
advocate for a more authentic contemporary architecture.
Pallasmaa’s perspective was ‘radical’ in the sense that he called for a 
renewed understanding of architecture’s ontology; the point of view being that 
architecture cannot disassociate itself from its metaphysical and existential basis:
‘Our culture identifies the world of ideals and the everyday, and thus nullifies the 
function of art as mediator between the two . . . art must stir a consciousness of the 
metaphysical dimension superseding the everyday . . . The job of architecture is not 
to beautify or “humanise” the world of everyday fact, but to open a view into the 
second dimension of our consciousness, the reality of dreams, images and memories’.35
The architect was interpolating towards what might be called a metaphysical 
house, one of specific primary architectural images, elements and details:
‘The house is composed by the architect as a system of spatial hierarchies and 
dynamics, structure, light, colour, etc., whereas home is structured around a few foci 
of behavior and symbolization: a front (front-yard, façade, the urban set-up), entry 
window, hearth, stove, table cupboard, bath, bookcase, furniture, family treasures, 
memorabilia. . .’36
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

81
It is against this backdrop of thinking, writing, teaching and practising 
that The Eyes of the Skin is first conceived, written and published in 1995–1996. 
Both Steven Holl, in his short preface to the book’s second edition, and 
Pallasmaa in his own introduction included here, review the circumstances that 
brought the book into being. Holl’s proposal to Pallasmaa and Pėrez-Gómez 
that they join him in the 1993 A + U Special Edition entitled Questions of 
Perception obviously catalyses the perspectives and associations for all three.37 
For Pallasmaa, it is clear, however, that the ideas, research and concerns 
expressed so forcefully in The Eyes of the Skin had been fermenting for some 
time, and while the book can be read as an ambitious counterpoint to current 
events in architecture at the time, the book possesses a more important and 
lasting value when read as Pallasmaa’s attempt to crystallise his attitudes, 
perceptions and insights for a longer duration.
Poetics
Pallasmaa’s built work, produced over the last 50 years, threads throughout 
Helsinki, Finland, and into the world. Scattered among the Finnish archipelago 
in the Gulf of Finland are a series of small summer houses, including the 
architect’s own hut, each site-specific experiments in material and detail. In 
Helsinki, his work registers in the city at a variety of scales, from a graceful set 
of bridges and pedestrian walks in the urban Ruoholahti neighbourhood to a 
subtle Market Hall restoration; from the understated, forest-green city 
telephone kiosks (now practically disappeared from the city streets!) and refuse 
containers to intimate, reinvigorated commercial courtyards; from restrained, 
elegant shop designs to finely detailed apartment interiors; from the street 
19.  Siida, The Sámi Lapp Museum and 
Northern Lapland Visitor Center, Inari, 
1990–1998.
Photo Rauno Träskelin.
20.  Korundi Cultural Center, Rovaniemi, 
Lapland, 
1984–1986/2008–2011. 
The 
Concert Hall.
Source: From Rauno Träskelin.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

82
lights and walkways surrounding Holl’s Kiasma Museum of Contemporary Art 
to the 250-metre interior court of the Eastern Center shopping mall and 
Helsinki’s Kamppi Center, a multi-storey complex of shops, housing, public 
transportation services and public squares.
In Kuopio, a regional capital in eastern Finland, an arc and chord 
courthouse addition; in Rovaniemi, on the Arctic Circle, a light-filled art 
museum shaped from the brick shell of a former bus depot, animated in its first 
phase by skilfully inserted and elegant details and in its second, most recent 
phase by an intimate chamber music hall, the colouration of which was 
designed in collaboration with the artist Jorma Hautala (the latter Pallasmaa’s 
last publicly scaled work). In Inari, far above the Arctic Circle, an ethnographic 
museum for the Sami people of Lapland stands, aptly named SIIDA (‘homestead’ 
in the Sami language), a building design addressing complex issues of cultural 
representation, natural light, geography and climate.
Overseas, his Finnish Cultural Institute graces the Rue des Ėcoles, near the 
Sorbonne in Paris, a smoothly finished ‘jewel-box’ of interlocking volumes and 
spaces inside a former theatre. The Finnish Embassy in Beijing displays 
administrative quarters, a garden and a sauna, intertwining Finnish identity with 
deference to the host country’s architectural traditions. And at the Cranbrook 
Schools in Michigan, long allied with Finnish architecture and design, an arrival 
area for the campus interweaves columns, paving stones, landscape, curving 
bronze panels, lighting and appeals to the cosmos into the Cranbrook fabric.
Throughout the work, a belief in the bodily experience of architecture 
upholds ‘the tactile over the visual’ and acknowledges as well a metaphysical 
21.  Finnish Institute, Rue des 
Écoles, Paris, 1986–1991. In 
collaboration with Roland 
Schweitzer and Sami Tabet, Paris.
22. Arrival Plaza, Cranbrook Academy, 
Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, 1994. In 
collaboration with Dan Hoffman and the 
Cranbrook Architecture Studio.
Photo Balthazar Korab.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

83
dimension to the task of building. The emphasis on the totality of design at 
all scales  – through a graceful, sophisticated combination of geometry, 
materials, craftsmanship and detail – resonates throughout both his thought 
and work. Architecture is subsumed by a more complete process of design, 
one in which the tactile experience of space, light and material is balanced 
against the intellectual ordering of form through geometry and structure. 
Space and structure are rendered minimally, leaving a field for the elaboration 
of material. A certain palpable quality, a subtle eroticism, hovers over many 
elements. Inhabitants and visitors are seduced into such experience by the 
gift of the designed objects themselves – sensually curved door handles and 
drawer pulls are offered to the hand and fingers, for example. There is evident 
pleasure in the crafting of materials, both luxurious and simple, such as a coil 
of stainless steel, carved blocks of rusted steel, brass handles and 
layered plywood.
As with his ambitions for our experience of reading The Eyes of the Skin, 
Pallasmaa’s intent in his designs is to slow down our experience of the designed 
space; it is an effect achieved by the thoughtful placement of architectural 
elements, by the careful use of coloured surfaces, by the introduction of shafts 
and washes of natural light from subtly placed roof lights, clerestories and framed 
wall openings, by the considered juxtaposition of materials, by the subtle 
imposition in ordering geometries in both plan and section and by the intense 
concentration on the precise crafting of each specific component and detail. 
The result is a ‘collage’, but one in which what is left to chance is the individual 
sensory experience alone, the subjective relationships and linkages created by 
the participation of those entering into the space, and their tactile memories. It 
23.  Summer studio of Tor 
Arne, painter, Vänö Islands, 
South Western Archipelago of 
the Gulf of Finland. Built of 
stones collected from the site.
Source: Juhani Pallasmaa.
24. Two-family house Enarvi, Helsinki, 1972. The 
facade elements are made of plastics. Source: From 
Kari Hakli.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

84
is the slowed passage of time that allows the tactile experience to resonate 
within one’s consciousness long after departing from the design: the memory of 
granite disc or colonnade, a sweeping curve of tile and wall, a stair of an 
attenuated steel structure, a continuous succession of perforated door, wall and 
ceiling panels. A simple quietude, a calm reflection born of one’s intimate 
discovery of an underlying spatial order, is animated by the appeal of the sensual 
use of materials and the comprehension of the craftsmanship of each element.
As his design career was succeeded by a dedication to writing and 
teaching, Pallasmaa travelled and lectured more and more often, usually to a full 
auditorium of entranced architecture students, professors, and professionals. In 
those, too, as with his buildings and writings, time slowed and acquired a 
palpable density. Throughout presentations often of several hundred stunning 
images – which usually form a second narrative to the spoken text – he dwelled 
on the essential tasks of art, architecture and education in our culture. In a 
darkened hall, his lecture would rise in tone and slow in pace to close with a 
central emphasis, quite often similar to this:
The duty of education is to cultivate and support the human abilities of imagina-
tion and empathy, but the prevailing values of culture tend to discourage fantasy, 
suppress the senses, and petrify the boundary between the world and the self. 
Education in creativity today has to begin with a questioning of the absoluteness of 
the world, and the expansion of the boundaries of the self. The main object of 
artistic education is not in the principles of artistic making, but in the personality 
of the student and his or her image of themselves and the world. The idea of sen-
sory training is nowadays connected solely with artistic education proper, but the 
refinement of sensory sensitivity and sensory thinking has an irreplaceable value in 
many other areas of human activity. I want to say more: the education of the senses 
and the imagination is necessary for a full and dignified life.38
Witnessing these lectures over many years, Pallasmaa’s words always 
deeply resonated with audiences  – whether of architecture students or 
professionals in other disciplines  – and often led first to an appreciative, 
meditative silence and then an animated set of questions.
Since at least 1985 – the publication of “The Geometry of Feeling” – and 
certainly since the first 1996 publication of The Eyes of the Skin, Pallasmaa’s work 
and thought has often been cited as an example of architectural phenomenology 
in anthologies of architectural theory, of philosophy applied into architectural 
thinking. The classifications are easy to understand, but simplistic – as simplistic 
as the labels of “Finnish minimalist” or “Nordic regionalist”. The origins of 
Pallasmaa’s work are layered, diverse and emerge from a more general humanistic 
tradition, as this introduction proposes, and Pallasmaa himself avoids any claim 
of being either a philosopher or a phenomenologist, due to his lack of formal 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

85
education in the discipline and the philosophical method. “I am an amateur in 
this field”, he declares, “(but) have read countless books by philosophers out 
of my personal interest in the enigma of human existence and the essence of 
knowledge”.39 He insists on his position as an architect working from an 
empirical, humanist stance: “I  would rather say that my current view of 
architecture and art is parallel with what I understand the phenomenological 
stance to be. My “phenomenology” arises from my experiences as an architect, 
teacher, writer and collaborator with numerous fine artists, as well as my 
experiences of life in general”.40
Pallasmaa is fond of quoting Bachelard’s reference to the Dutch 
phenomenologist J H van den Berg’s argument, “Painters and poets are born 
phenomenologists”, as well as Merleau-Ponty’s similar question, “How 
could a painter or a poet express anything other than his encounter with the 
world?” In response, and on the basis of his experiences, Pallasmaa asserts 
that as an architect, he too is a “born phenomenologist” – and encourages 
this belief among all architects: “. . . in my view, an architect is bound to 
explore and express this very same encounter (with the world). I believe that 
I am an architect primarily for the reason that this craft offers particularly 
essential and meaningful possibilities of touching the boundaries of one’s 
self and the world, and experiencing how they mingle and fuse into 
each other”.41
The Eyes of the Skin can perhaps be read, then, as another “gentle 
manifesto” in architectural thinking  – but with far less emphasis on 
“complexity” or “contradiction” in architectural form. Pallasmaa does not 
aim for, or believe in, a prescriptive architectural theory; his approach, he says, 
is “in accordance with Edmund Husserl’s notion of phenomenology as “pure 
looking”, an innocent and unbiased encounter with phenomena, in the same 
manner that a painter looks at a landscape, a poet seeks a poetic image for 
a  particular human experience  – an architect imagines an existentially 
meaningful space”.42 Such existential concentration is the focus of Pallasmaa’s 
insights: “Architecture is fundamentally existential in its very essence, and it 
arises from existential experience and wisdom rather than intellectualised 
and formalized theories. We can only prepare ourselves for our work in 
architecture by developing a distinct sensitivity and awareness for architectural 
phenomena”.43
The Eyes of the Skin embodies this existential task, and encourages the 
development of such sensitivities. But although without prescription, the book 
proposes more than just diagnosis. Pallasmaa’s approach is open-handed and 
open-ended, an authentically “open-source” for the consideration, conception 
and construction of a meaningful, sustaining architecture. The Eyes of the Skin 
proposes a renewed and invigorated education of the architect, perhaps as 
familiar to Vitruvius as it might have been to Semper, a reassertion of the 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

86
“poetics” inherent in the very meaning of the original words education and 
architect. Pallasmaa is emphatic on this poetic and ultimately optimistic mission:
As educators we often use the notion “poetics” when speaking of the finest archi-
tectural qualities. At the face of the common utility and vulgarity of construction 
today this may sound pretentious, but I see as the fundamental task of architecture 
the mediation between the world and ourselves, history, present and future, human 
institutions and individuals, and between the material and the spiritual. This is 
nothing short of a poetic calling. As the settings of our lives are losing their human 
meaning, it is the task of art and architecture to re-mythicize, re-sensualize and re-
eroticize our relationship with the world. Again, the question is about the poetic 
dimension of life. I do not consider the search for the poetic essence of architecture 
as a romantic or unrealistic endeavour, but as an absolute necessity. Simply, human-
ity is lost when life loses its echo in the deep historicity and spirituality of existence. 
Architecture can strengthen and maintain our grasp of the world and ourselves, and 
support humility and pride, curiosity and optimism.44
A door handle, a handshake, a conversation, an encounter: such is this 
small book.
25.  Sketches for door pulls, late 1980s.
26.  Sketches for light fixtures, early 1990s.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

88
NOTES
FOREWORD
1 Steven Holl, Juhani Pallasmaa and Alberto 
Pérez-­Gómez, Questions of Perception: 
Phenomenology of Architecture, Special Edition, 
A+U Publishing (Tokyo), July 1994.
2 Steen Eiler Rasmussen, Experiencing 
Architecture, MIT Press (Cambridge, 
MA), 1959.
3 Maurice Merleau-­Ponty, The Visible and 
the Invisible, Northwestern University Press 
(Evanston, IL), 1968, pp 148–9.
INTRODUCTION: 
TOUCHING 
THE WORLD
1 James Turrell, ‘Plato’s Cave and Light 
Within’, in Mikko Heikkinen (ed), Elephant 
and Butterfly: Permanence and Change in 
Architecture, 9th Alvar Aalto Symposium 
(  Jyväskylä), 2003, p 144.
2 Ashley Montagu, Touching: The Human 
Signif  icance of the Skin, Harper & Row 
(New York, NY), 1986, p 3.
3 A notion of Johann Wolfgang von 
Goethe, as referred to in ibid, p 30.
4 Ludwig Wittgenstein, ‘MS 112 46: 
14.10.1931,’ in GH von Wright (ed), Ludwig 
Wittgenstein – Culture and Value, Blackwell 
(Oxford), 2002, p 24e.
5 See, for example, Arnold H Modell, 
Imagination and the Meaningful Brain, MIT Press 
(Cambridge, MA; London), 2003, and Mark 
Johnson, The Meaning of the Body: Aesthetics of 
Human Understanding, University of Chicago 
Press (Chicago, IL; London), 2007.
6 See Anton Ehrenzweig, The Psychoanalysis 
of Artistic Vision and Hearing: An Introduction 
to a Theory of Unconscious Perception, Sheldon 
Press (London), 1975.
THE EYES OF THE SKIN, 
PARTS 1 AND 2
1 As quoted in Brooke Hodge (ed), Not 
Architecture But Evidence That It Exists: 
Lauretta Vinciarelli – Watercolors, Harvard 
University Graduate School of Design 
(Harvard), 1998, p 130.
2 Friedrich Nietzsche, Thus Spake 
Zarathustra, Viking Press (New York), 
1956, p 224.
3 Richard Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror 
of Nature, Princeton University Press 
(Prinecton, NJ), 1979, p 239.
4 Jorge Luis Borges, Selected Poems 
1923–1967, Penguin (London), 1985, as 
quoted in Sören Thurell, The Shadow of A 
Thought: The Janus Concept in Architecture, 
School of Architecture, The Royal Institute 
of Technology (Stockholm), 1989, p 2.
The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the Senses, Fourth Edition. Juhani Pallasmaa.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

89
5 As quoted in Richard Kearney, ‘Maurice 
Merleau-­Ponty’, in Richard Kearney (ed), 
Modern Movements in European Philosophy, 
Manchester University Press (Manchester; 
New York, NY), 1994, p 82.
6 Heraclitus, Fragment 101a, as quoted 
in David Michael Levin (ed), Modernity 
and the Hegemony of Vision, University 
of California Press (Berkeley and Los 
Angeles, CA), 1993, p 1.
7 Plato, Timaeus, 47b, as quoted in Martin 
Jay, Downcast Eyes: The Denigration of Vision in 
Twentieth-­Century French Thought, University 
of California Press (Berkeley and Los 
Angeles, CA), 1994, p 27.
8 Georgia Warnke, ‘Ocularcentrism and Social 
Criticism’, in Levin (1993), op cit, p 287.
9 Thomas R Flynn, ‘Foucault and the 
Eclipse of Vision’, in Levin (1993), 
op cit, p 274.
10 Peter Sloterdijk, Critique of Cynical 
Reason, trans Michael Eldred, as quoted in 
Jay (1994), op cit, p 21.
11 As referred to in Steven Pack, 
‘Discovering (Through) the Dark Interstice 
of Touch’, History and Theory Graduate Studio 
1992–1994, McGill School of Architecture 
(Montreal), 1994.
12 Levin (1993), op cit, p 2.
13 Ibid, p 3.
14 David Harvey, The Condition of 
Postmodernity, Blackwell (Cambridge), 
1992, p 327.
15 David Michael Levin, ‘Decline and 
Fall – Ocularcentrism in Heidegger’s 
Reading of the History of Metaphysics’, in 
Levin (1993), op cit, p 205.
16 David Michael Levin, Ibid, p 212.
17 Dalia Judovitz, ‘Vision, Representation, 
and Technology in Descartes’, in Levin 
(1993), op cit, p 71.
18 Levin (1993), op cit, p 4.
19 Friedrich Nietzsche, The Will to Power, 
Book II, trans Walter Kaufmann, Random 
House (New York, NY), 1968, note 
461, p 253.
20 Max Scheler, Vom Umsturz der Werte: 
Abhandlungen und Aufsätze, as quoted in David 
Michael Levin, The Body’s Recollection of Being, 
Routledge & Kegan Paul (London; Boston, 
MA; Melbourne; Henley), 1985, p 57.
21 Jay (1994), op cit.
22 Martin Jay, ‘Sartre, Merleau-­Ponty, and 
the Search for A New Ontology of Sight’, 
in Levin (1993), op cit, p 149.
23 As referenced in Richard Kearney, ‘Jean-­
Paul Sartre’, in Kearney, Modern Movements 
in European Philosophy, op cit, p 63.
24 Jay (1994), op cit, p 149.
25 Sigfried Giedion, Space, Time and 
Architecture: The Growth of a New Tradition, 
5th revised and enlarged edition, Harvard 
University Press (Cambridge, MA), 1997.
26 Op cit., p. 376.
27 Martin Jay, ‘Scopic Regimes of 
Modernity’, in Hal Foster (ed), Vision and 
Visuality, Bay Press (Seattle, WA), 1988, p 10.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

90
28 Merleau-­Ponty describes the 
notion of the flesh in his essay 
‘The Intertwining – The Chiasm’, 
in Claude Lefort (ed), The Visible and the 
Invisible, Northwestern University Press 
(Evanston, IL), 4th printing, 1992: ‘My body 
is made of the same flesh as the world [. . .] 
this flesh of my body is shared by the world’ 
(p 248); and, ‘The flesh (of the world or my 
own) is [. . .] a texture that returns to itself 
and conforms to itself ’ (p 146). The notion 
derives from Merleau-­Ponty’s dialectical 
principle of the intertwining of the world 
and the self. He also speaks of the ‘ontology 
of the flesh’ as the ultimate conclusion of 
his initial phenomenology of perception. 
This ontology implies that meaning 
is both within and without, subjective 
and objective, spiritual and material. See 
Richard Kearney, ‘Maurice Merleau-­Ponty’, 
in Kearney, Modern Movements in European 
Philosophy, op cit, pp 73–90.
29 As quoted in Hubert L Dreyfus 
and Patricia Allen Dreyfus, ‘Translators’ 
Introduction’, in Maurice Merleau-­Ponty 
(ed), Sense and Non-­Sense, Northwestern 
University Press (Evanston, IL), 1964, p XII.
30 Maurice Merleau-­Ponty, ‘The Film and 
the New Psychology’, in ibid, p 48.
31 Italo Calvino, Six Memos for the Next 
Millennium, Vintage Books (New York, 
NY), 1988, p 57.
32 Martin Heidegger, ‘The Age of the 
World Picture’, in Martin Heidegger (ed), 
The Question Concerning Technology and Other 
Essays, Harper & Row (New York, NY), 
1977, p 134.
33 Harvey, op cit, pp 261–307.
34 Ibid, p 293.
35 As quoted in ibid, p 293.
36 Edward T Hall, The Hidden Dimension, 
Doubleday (New York, NY), 1969.
37 Walter J Ong, Orality and Literacy: 
The Technologizing of the World, 
Routledge (London and New York, 
NY), 1991.
38 Ibid. p 117.
39 Ibid. p 121.
40 Ibid, p 122.
41 Ibid. p 12.
42 As quoted in Jay (1994), op cit, p 34.
43 As quoted in ibid, pp 34–5.
44 Gaston Bachelard, The Poetics of Space, 
Beacon Press (Boston, MA), 1969, p XII.
45 Leon Battista Alberti, as quoted in Levin 
(1993), op cit, p 64.
46 As quoted in Jay (1994), op cit, p 5.
47 Le Corbusier, Precisions, MIT Press 
(Cambridge, MA), 1991, p 7.
48 Pierre-­Alain Crosset, ‘Eyes Which See’, 
Casabella, 531–532 (1987), p 115.
49 Le Corbusier (1991), op cit, p 231.
50 Ibid, p 227.
51 Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture, 
Architectural Press (London) and Frederick 
A Praeger (New York, NY), 1959, p 164.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

91
52 Ibid, p 191.
53 Walter Gropius, Architektur, Fischer 
(Frankfurt; Hamburg), 1956, pp 15–25.
54 As quoted in Susan Sontag, On Photography, 
Penguin (New York, NY), 1986, p 96.
55 Le Corbusier (1959), op cit, p 31.
56 Alvar Aalto, ‘Taide ja tekniikka’ [Art and 
Technology] (1955), in Alvar Aalto and 
Göran Schildt (eds), Alvar Aalto: Luonnoksia 
[Sketches], Otava (Helsinki), 1972, p 87 
(trans Juhani Pallasmaa).
57 As quoted in Jay (1994), op cit, p 19.
58 Harvey, op cit, p 58.
59 Fredric Jameson, as quoted in ibid, p 58.
60 Maurice Merleau-­Ponty, The 
Phenomenology of Perception, as quoted in 
Iain McGilchrist (ed), The Master and His 
Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of 
the Western World, Yale University Press (New 
Haven, CT), 2009, p 184.
61 Levin (1993), op cit, p 203.
62 Sontag, op cit, p 7.
63 Ibid, p 16.
64 Ibid, p 24.
65 From a conversation with Professor 
Keijo Petäjä in the early 1980s; the source is 
unidentified.
66 Hans Sedlmayr, Art in Crisis: The Lost 
Centre, Hollis & Carter (London), 1957.
67 Maurice Merleau-­Ponty, ‘Cézanne’s 
Doubt’, in Merleau-­Ponty (1964), op cit, p 19.
68 Martin Jay, ‘Scopic Regimes of 
Modernity’, in Hal Foster (ed), Vision and 
Visuality, Bay Press (Seattle, WA), 1988, p 18.
69 Ibid, p 16.
70 Ibid, p 17.
71 David Michael Levin, The Opening of 
Vision: Nihilism and the Postmodern Situation, 
Routledge (New York, NY; London), 
1988, p 440.
72 Ibid.
73 Ong, op cit, p 136.
74 Montagu, op cit, p XIII.
75 With its 800,000 fibres and 18 times 
more nerve endings than in the cochlear 
nerve of the ear, the optic nerve is able 
to transmit an incredible amount of 
information to the brain, at a rate which 
far exceeds that of all the other sense 
organs. Each eye contains 120 million rods 
which take in information on roughly five 
hundred levels of lightness and darkness, 
while more than seven million cones make 
it possible for us to distinguish among 
more than one million combinations of 
colour. Jay (1994), op cit, p 6
76 Edward Relph, Place and Placelessness.
77 Kearney, Modern Movements in European 
Philosophy, op cit, p 74.
78 Maurice Merleau-­Ponty, Phenomenology 
of Perception, Routledge (London), 
1992. p 203.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

92
79 Ibid, p 225.
80 Kent C Bloomer and Charles W 
Moore, Body, Memory, and Architecture, 
Yale University Press (New Haven, CT; 
London), 1977, p 44.
81 Ibid, p 105.
82 1Ibid, p 107.
83 Gaston Bachelard, The Poetics of Reverie, 
Beacon Press (Boston, MA), 1971, p 6.
84 On the basis of experiments with 
animals, scientists have identified 17 
different ways in which living organisms 
can respond to the environment. 
Jay (1994), op cit, p 6.
85 Bloomer and Moore, op cit, p 33.
86 The anthropology and spiritual 
psychology based on Rudolf Steiner’s 
studies of the senses distinguishes 12 senses: 
touch; life sense; self-­movement sense; 
balance; smell; taste; vision; temperature 
sense; hearing; language sense; conceptual 
sense; and ego sense. Albert Soesman, 
Our Twelve Senses: Wellsprings of the Soul, 
Hawthorn Press (Stroud, Glos), 1998.
87 Quoted in Victor Burgin, ‘Perverse 
Space’, as quoted in Beatriz Colomina (ed), 
Sexuality and Space, Princeton Architectural 
Press (Princeton, NJ), 1992, p 233
88 Jay, as quoted in Levin (1993), op cit.
89 Stephen Houlgate, ‘Vision, Reflection, 
and Openness: The “Hegemony of Vision” 
from a Hegelian Point of View’, in Levin 
(1993), op cit, p 100.
90 As quoted in Houlgate, ibid, p 100.
91 As quoted in Houlgate, ibid, p 108.
92 Merleau-­Ponty (1964), op cit, p 15.
93 As quoted in Montagu, op cit, p 308.
94 As referenced by Montagu, ibid.
95 Le Corbusier (1959), op cit, p 11.
96 Bachelard (1971), op cit, p 6.
97 Kakuzo Okakura, The Book of Tea, 
Kodansha International (Tokyo; New York, 
NY), 1989, p 83.
98 Edward S Casey, Remembering: A 
Phenomenological Study, Indiana University 
Press (Bloomington and Indianapolis, IN), 
2000, p 172.
99 As quoted in Judovitz, in Levin (1993), 
op cit, p 80.
100 Maurice Merleau-­Ponty, The Primacy of 
Perception, James M Edie (ed), Northwestern 
University Press (Evanston, IL), 2000, p 162.
101 Le Corbusier (1959), op cit, p 7.
102 Merleau-­Ponty (1964), op cit, p 19.
103 Jun’ichirō Tanizaki, In Praise of Shadows, 
Leete’s Island Books (New Haven, CT), 
1977, p 16.
104 Alejandro Ramírez Ugarte, ‘Interview 
with Luis Barragán’ (1962), in Enrique X 
de Anda Alanis, Luis Barragán: Clásico del 
Silencio, Collección Somosur (Bogota), 
1989, p 242.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

93
105 Ong, op cit, p 73.
106 Adrian Stokes, ‘Smooth and Rough’, 
in The Critical Writings of Adrian Stokes, 
Volume II, Thames & Hudson (London), 
1978, p 245.
107 Steen Eiler Rasmussen, Experiencing 
Architecture, MIT Press (Cambridge, 
MA), 1993.
108 Ibid, p 225.
109 Karsten Harries, ‘Building and 
the Terror of Time’, Perspecta: The Yale 
Architectural Journal (New Haven, CT), 19 
(1982), pp 59–69.
110 Cyril Connolly, The Unquiet Grave: A 
Word Cycle by Palinurus, Curwen Press for 
Horizon (London), 1944.
111 Quoted in Emilio Ambasz, The 
Architecture of Luis Barragán, The Museum of 
Modern Art (New York, NY), 1976, p 108.
112 Bachelard (1969), op cit, p 13.
113 Diane Ackerman, A Natural History of 
the Senses, Vintage Books (New York, NY), 
1991, p 45.
114 Rainer Maria Rilke, The Notebooks 
of Malte Laurids Brigge, trans MD Herter 
Norton, W.W. Norton & Company 
(New York, NY; London), 1992, pp 47–8.
115 Rainer Maria Rilke, Auguste Rodin, 
trans Daniel Slager, Archipelago Books 
(New York, NY), 2004, p 45.
116 Martin Heidegger, ‘What Calls for 
Thinking’, in Martin Heidegger, Basic 
Writings, Harper & Row (New York, NY), 
1977, p 357.
117 Bachelard (1971), op cit, p XXXIV.
118 Ibid, p 7.
119 Marcel Proust, Kadonnutta aikaa 
etsimässä, Combray [Remembrance of 
Things Past, Combray], Otava (Helsinki), 
1968, p 10.
120 Gaston Bachelard, The Poetics of Space, 
Beacon Press (Boston, MA), 1968, p 34.
121 Stokes, op cit, p 243.
122 Source unidentified.
123 Stokes, op cit, p 316.
124 Tanizaki, op cit, p 15.
125 Bachelard (1971), op cit, p 91.
126 Ibid, p 15.
127 ‘From Eclecticism to Doubt’, dialogue 
between Eileen Gray and Jean Badovici, 
L’Architecture Vivante, 1923–33, Autumn-­
Winter 1929, as quoted in Colin St John 
Wilson, The Other Tradition of Modern 
Architecture, Academy Editions (London), 
1995, p 112.
128 Tadao Ando, ‘The Emotionally Made 
Architectural Spaces of Tadao Ando’, as 
quoted in Kenneth Frampton, ‘The Work 
of Tadao Ando’, in Yukio Futagawa (ed), 
Tadao Ando, ADA Edita (Tokyo), 1987, p 11.
129 In the mid-­19th century, the American 
sculptor Horatio Greenough gave with 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

94
this notion the first formulation on the 
interdependence of form and function, 
which later became the ideological 
cornerstone of Functionalism. Horatio 
Greenough, Form and Function: Remarks 
on Art, Design, and Architecture, Harold A 
Small (ed), University of California Press 
(Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA), 1966.
130 Henri Bergson, Matter and Memory, 
Zone Books (New York, NY), 1991, p 21.
131 Casey, op cit, p 149.
132 Alvar Aalto, ‘From the Doorstep to 
the Common Room’ (1926), in Göran 
Schildt, Alvar Aalto: The Early Years, Rizzoli 
International Publications (New York, NY), 
1984, p 214–18.
133 Fred and Barbro Thompson, ‘Unity 
of Time and Space’, Arkkitehti, The Finnish 
Architectural Review, 1981, issue 2, pp 68–70.
134 As quoted in ‘Translators’ Introduction’ 
by Hubert L Dreyfus and Patricia Allen 
Dreyfus in Merleau-­Ponty (1964), op 
cit, p XII.
135 As quoted in Bachelard (1969), op 
cit, p 137.
136 Henry Moore, ‘The Sculptor Speaks’, 
in Philip James (ed), Henry Moore on 
Sculpture, MacDonald (London), 1966, p 62.
137 Ibid, p 79.
138 Merleau-­Ponty (1964), op cit, p 17.
139 See, for instance, Hanna Segal, Melanie 
Klein, The Viking Press (New York, 
NY), 1979.
140 Richard Lang, ‘The Dwelling Door: 
Towards a Phenomenology of Transition’, 
in David Seamon and Robert Mugerauer, 
Dwelling, Place and Environment, Columbia 
University Press (New York, NY), 
1982, p 202.
141 Louis I Kahn, ‘I Love Beginnings’, in 
Alessandra Latour (ed), Louis I Kahn: Writings, 
Lectures, Interviews, Rizzoli International 
Publications (New York, NY), 1991, p 288.
142 Jeff Malpas in his lecture at the 
Understanding and Designing Place 
Symposium at the Tampere University on 
3 April, 2017.
143 Jean-­Paul Sartre, What Is Literature?, 
Peter Smith (Gloucester), 1978, p 3.
144 Ibid, p 4.
145 Alvar Aalto, ‘Rationalism and Man’ 
(1935), in Alvar Aalto and Göran Schildt 
(eds), Alvar Aalto: Sketches, trans Stuart 
Wrede, MIT Press (Cambridge, MA; 
London), 1978, p 48.
146 Frank Lloyd Wright, ‘Integrity’, in 
The Natural House, 1954. Published in 
Frank Lloyd Wright: Writings and Buildings, 
selected by Edgar Kaufmann and Ben 
Raeburn, Horizon Press (New York, NY), 
1960, pp 292–3.
A DOOR HANDLE, 
A HANDSHAKE: 
AN INTRODUCTION 
TO JUHANI PALLASMAA 
AND HIS WORK
Portions of the text are excerpted from: 
Peter MacKeith, ‘A Full and Dignified 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

95
Life’, Archipelago: Essays on Architecture, 
Rakennustieto (Helsinki), 2006, pp 214–34.
1 Juhani Pallasmaa, as quoted in ‘An 
Architectural Confession’ (2010 
unpublished manuscript provided to 
the author).
2 Ibid.
3 Ibid.
4 Alvar Aalto, ‘The Humanizing of 
Architecture’ (1940), in Alvar Aalto and 
Göran Schildt (eds), Alvar Aalto: Sketches, 
trans Stuart Wrede, MIT Press (Cambridge, 
MA), 1985, p 77.
5 Steen Eiler Rasmussen, Experiencing 
Architecture, MIT Press (Cambridge, 
MA), 1959.
6 Useful references to Sigurd Lewerentz 
are: Janne Ahlin, Sigurd Lewerentz, Architect, 
MIT Press (Cambridge, MA), 1989; Adam 
Ed Caruso, Sigurd Lewerentz: Two Churches, 
Gingko Press (Hamburg), 1999; Nicola 
Flora, Paolo Giardiello and Gennaro 
Postiglione (eds), Sigurd Lewerentz, Phaidon 
(London), 2006.
7 Key publications by Christian Norberg-­
Schulz, include: Intentions in Architecture, 
MIT Press (Cambridge, MA), 1968; 
Existence, Space and Architecture, Praeger 
Publishers (New York, NY), 1974; Genius 
Loci: Towards a Phenomenology of Architecture, 
Rizzoli (New York, NY), 1984.
8 Useful references to Sverre Fehn are: 
Per Olaf Fjeld, Sverre Fehn: The Thought 
of Construction, Rizzoli (New York, NY), 
1983; Per Olaf Fjeld, Sverre Fehn: The 
Pattern of Thoughts, Monacelli (New York, 
NY), 2009.
9 Useful references for Colin St John 
Wilson are: Colin St John Wilson, 
Architectural Reflections: Studies in the 
Philosophy and Practice of Architecture, 
Butterworth-­Heinemann (London), 1992; 
Colin St John Wilson, The Other Tradition of 
Modern Architecture: The Uncompleted Project, 
Academy Editions (London), 1995; Roger 
Stonehouse and Eric Parry, Colin St John 
Wilson: Buildings and Projects, Black Dog 
Publishing (London), 2007.
10 Key publications by Adrian Stokes, 
include: The Quattro Cento: and, Stones of 
Rimini, Pennsylvania State University Press 
(University Park, PA), 2002 (originally 
published 1932 and 1934 respectively); 
Smooth and Rough, Faber & Faber (London), 
1951; The Image in Form, Penguin 
(London), 1972.
11 Key writings by Kenneth Frampton, 
include: ‘Towards a Critical Regionalism: 
Six Points for an Architecture of 
Resistance’, in Hal Foster (ed), The Anti-­
Aesthetic: Essays on Postmodern Culture, 
Bay Press (Port Townsend, WA), 1983, 
pp 16–30; Studies in Tectonic Culture: The 
Poetics of Construction in Nineteenth and 
Twentieth Century Architecture, MIT Press 
(Cambridge, MA), 2001; Labour, Work and 
Architecture, Phaidon Press (London), 2002; 
Modern Architecture: A Critical History (World 
of Art), Thames & Hudson (London), 4th 
edition, 2007.
12 Gaston Bachelard, The Poetics of Space, 
Beacon Press (Boston, MA), 1969.
13 Useful references to Steven Holl and 
the design of Kiasma, the Museum of 
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

96
Contemporary Art, Helsinki are: KIASMA, 
Museum of Contemporary Art, Helsinki, 
Gingko Press (Berkeley, CA), 1999; 
Annette LeCuyer,‘Iconic Kiasma’, The 
Architectural Review, August 1998, pp 46–53; 
Peter MacKeith, ‘The Helsinki Museum 
Competition’, Competitions 4, issue 2 
(Summer 1994), pp 44–51.
14 Alberto Pérez-­Gómez, Architecture and 
the Crisis of Modern Science, MIT Press 
(Cambridge, MA), 1983.
15 Key writings by Gaston Bachelard, 
include: Earth and Reveries of Will: An Essay 
on the Imagination of Matter, trans Kenneth 
Haltman, Dallas Institute of Humanities 
and Culture (Dallas, TX), 3rd edition, 2002; 
Air and Dreams: An Essay on the Imagination 
of Movement, trans Edith R Farrell and 
C Frederick Farrell, Dallas Institute of 
Humanities and Culture (Dallas, TX), 3rd 
edition, 1988; Water and Dreams: An Essay 
on the Imagination of Matter, trans Edith R 
Farrell, Dallas Institute of Humanities & 
Culture (Dallas, TX), 3rd edition, 1999; 
The Psychoanalysis of Fire, trans Alan CM 
Ross, Beacon Press (New York, NY), 
1987; The Poetics of Reverie: Childhood, 
Language, and the Cosmos, trans Daniel 
Russell, Beacon Press (New York, NY), 
1971. Key writings by Maurice Merleau-­
Ponty, include: The Structure of Behavior, 
trans Alden Fisher, Beacon Press (Boston, 
MA), 1963; Phenomenology of Perception, 
trans Colin Smith, Humanities Press 
(New York, NY), 1962; Sense and Non-­
Sense, trans Hubert Dreyfus and Patricia 
Allen Dreyfus, Northwestern University 
Press (Evanston, IL), 1964; The Visible and 
the Invisible, Followed by Working Notes, trans 
Alphonso Lingis, Northwestern University 
Press (Evanston, IL), 1968; The Prose of the 
World, trans John O’Neill, Northwestern 
University Press (Evanston, IL), 1973.
16 Juhani Pallasmaa, The Thinking Hand: 
Existential and Embodied Wisdom in 
Architecture, AD Primer, John Wiley & Sons 
(Chichester), 2009; Juhani Pallasmaa, The 
Embodied Image: Imagination and Imagery in 
Architecture, AD Primer (ed), John Wiley & 
Sons (Chichester), 2011.
17 Pallasmaa, ‘An Architectural Confession’ 
(2010), op cit.
18 Ibid.
19 Franz Kafka, letter to Oskar Pollak, 
27 January 1904; cited from Max Brod (ed), 
Briefe, 1902–1924, Schocken (New York, 
NY), 1958.
20  Väinö Linna, Under the North Star (Finnish: 
Täällä Pohjantähden alla, original publication 
1959), trans Richard Impola, Aspasia Books 
(Beaverton, OR, Canada), 2001.
21 Milan Kundera, Romaanin taide (The Art 
of the Novel), WSOY (Helsinki), 1986, p 165.
22 Pallasmaa, ‘An Architectural Confession’ 
(2010), op cit.
23 Marja-­Riitta Norri, ‘The World of 
Juhani Pallasmaa’, in Juhani Pallasmaa and 
Marja-­Riitta Norri, Architecture in Miniature: 
Juhani Pallasmaa, Finland, The Museum of 
Finnish Architecture (Helsinki), 1991, p 3. 
Published in conjunction with the Alvar 
Aalto Pavilion exhibition of Pallasmaa’s 
work at the 5th International Exhibition 
of Architecture of the Venice Biennale, 8 
September to 6 October 1991.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

97
24 Juhani Pallasmaa, in conversation with 
Peter MacKeith, 2005. See ‘Landscapes: 
Juhani Pallasmaa in Conversation with Peter 
MacKeith’, Encounters: Architectural Essays, 
Rakennustieto (Helsinki), 2005, pp 6–22.
25 Juhani Pallasmaa and Marja-Riitta 
Norri, Architecture in Miniature: Juhani 
Pallasmaa, Finland, op. cit.
26 Pallasmaa, ‘An Architectural Confession’ 
(2010), op cit.
27 Juhani Pallasmaa, in conversation with 
Peter MacKeith, 2011.
28 Juhani Pallasmaa, in conversation with 
Peter MacKeith, 2005. See ‘Landscapes: 
Juhani Pallasmaa, in conversation with Peter 
MacKeith’ (2005), op cit.
29 Norri, ‘The World of Juhani 
Pallasmaa’, op cit.
30 Juhani Pallasmaa, in conversation with 
Peter MacKeith, 2005. See ‘Landscapes: 
Juhani Pallasmaa, in Conversation with 
Peter MacKeith’ (2005), op cit.
31 Juhani Pallasmaa, ‘The Two Languages 
of Architecture: Elements of a Bio-­Cultural 
Approach to Architecture’, Abacus 2, The 
Yearbook of the Museum of Finnish Architecture, 
The Museum of Finnish Architecture 
(Helsinki), 1980, pp 57–90.
32 Alvar Aalto, ‘The Humanizing of 
Architecture’, op cit.
33 Juhani Pallasmaa, ‘The Geometry of 
Feeling: A Look at the Phenomenology 
of Architecture’, Arkkitehti, The Finnish 
Architectural Review, 1985, issue 3, pp 44–9.
34 Pallasmaa, ‘An Architectural Confession’ 
(2010), op cit.
35 Norri, ‘The World of Juhani 
Pallasmaa’, op cit.
36 Juhani Pallasmaa, ‘Identity, Intimacy and 
Domicile: Notes on the Phenomenology of 
Home’, Arkkitehti, The Finnish Architectural 
Review, 1994, issue 1, pp 14–25.
37 Steven Holl, Juhani Pallasmaa and 
Alberto Pérez-­Gómez, Questions of Perception: 
Phenomenology of Architecture, Special Edition, 
A+U Publishing (Tokyo), July 1994.
38 Juhani Pallasmaa, lecture at Washington 
University in St Louis School of 
Architecture, 2005.
39 Pallasmaa, ‘An Architectural Confession’ 
(2010), op cit.
40 Ibid.
41 Pallasmaa, ‘An Architectural Confession’ 
(2010), op cit.
42 Ibid.
43 Ibid.
44 Juhani Pallasmaa, in conversation with 
Peter MacKeith, 2011.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

99
INDEX
5th Alvar Aalto Symposium (Jyväskylä, Finland, 
1991) ix, 69
A+U ix, 3, 81
Aalto, Alvar 22, 28, 40, 44, 55, 61, 65, 67, 
68, 76, 79
Acoustic intimacy 42–43
Action images 54–55
Alberti, Leon Battista 20, 28–30
Althusser, Louis 14
Ambo, Ethiopia: prototype house 78
Ando, Tadao 54, 78
Angelico, Fra: Annunciation 55
Apertures 72–81
Aquinas, St Thomas 10
Architectural Review, The 79, 80
Aristotle 10
Arkkitehti, the Finnish Architectural Review 79
Arnaud, Noël 55
Asplund, Erik Gunnar 65, 67, 68
Bachelard, Gaston 20, 34, 38, 46, 50–52, 69, 85
The Poetics of Space 69
Baroque 28, 30, 43
Barragán, Luis 46, 51
Barthes, Roland 14
Bataille, Georges 14
Benjamin, Walter 25
Berenson, Bernard 36
Bergson, Henri 14, 54
Berkeley, George 35
Berry, Chuck 72
Björkhagen church, Stockholm, Sweden 68
Blomstedt, Aulis 68, 76, 80
Bloomer, Kent C 34
Bodily identification 55–56
Bonnard, Pierre 36
Booth, Gotthard 25
Borges, Jorge Luis 9, 69
Bosch, Hieronymus 28
Brodsky, Joseph 69
Bruegel, Pieter, the Elder 28
Brunelleschi, Filippo 67
Calvino, Italo 16, 60
Caravaggio 39
Carleton University, Canada 69
Casa Batlló, Barcelona 50
Casey, Edward S 38, 54
Certeau, Michel de 17
Cézanne, Paul 30, 39, 56
Connolly, Cyril: The Unquiet Grave 46
Contemporary architecture 26–28
Cooper Union School of Architecture, 
New York 69
Cranbrook Academy, Bloomfield Hills
Architecture Studio 69
Michigan 82, 82
Cubists 30
Davey, Peter 80
Debord, Guy 14
Deconstructivism 80
Derrida, Jacques 14, 15
Desargues of Lyon, Gérard 19
Descartes, René 14
Dewey, John 33
DL James House, Carmel, California 51
Dostoevsky, Fyodor 60
Dutch paintings (17th-century) 28
Eastern Centre shopping mall, Helsinki 82
Egyptian architecture 43
Ehrenzweig, Anton 77
Expressionism 61
Fallingwater, Pennsylvania 36
Febvre, Lucien 19
The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the Senses, Fourth Edition. Juhani Pallasmaa.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

100
Fehn, Sverre 68, 69
Finnish Cultural Institute, Paris 82
Finnish Embassy, Beijing 82
Finnish Institute, Paris 82
Fjeld, Per Olaf: The Thought of 
Construction (1984) 68
Foucault, Michel 15
Frampton, Kenneth 68
Frankfurt School 68
Fromm, Erich 77
Functionalism 23
Gaudi, Antonio 50
Gestalt 6, 7, 23, 54, 61
Gibson, James J 35
Giedion, Sigfried; Space, Time and Architecture 15
Giotto 67
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von 9, 36
Gothic architecture 43
Grave marker 79
Gray, Eileen 52, 68
Great Peristyle, Karnak, Egypt 44
Greek architecture 20, 24
Greeks, ancient 11
Greek thought 10, 24
Greene, Charles and Henry 51
Gropius, Walter 21
Gullichsen, Kristian 75
Haile Selassie I University, Addis Abeba, 
Ethiopia 77, 78
Hall, Edward T 17
Harvey, David 11, 16, 24
Hautala, Jorma 82
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich 35
Heidegger, Martin 15, 68
Hejduk, John 69
Helsinki
Market Hall 81
Ruoholahti 81
Helsinki Institute of Technology: Faculty of 
Architecture 75
Helsinki Museum of Contemporary Art ix, 69
Helsinki University of Technology
Faculty of Architecture 75, 79
Otaniemi campus, Espoo 76
Heraclitus 10
Hitchcock, Alfred 60
Holl, Steven 3, 61, 69, 72, 74, 81, 82
Holl, Steven, Pallasmaa, Juhani and  
Pérez-Gómez, Alberto: Questions of Perception: 
Phenomenology of Architecture ix, 3, 72, 80–81
Husserl, Edmund 85
Impressionists 30
Institute of Industrial Arts, Helsinki 77
Irigaray, Luce 14
Jacobsen, Arne 65
Jameson, Fredric 24
Japanese thinking 55
Jay, Martin 30
Downcast Eyes: The Denigration of  
Vision in Twentieth-Century French 
Thought 14
Jefferson, Thomas 70
Juhani Pallasmaa Architects, Helsinki: Library/
conference room 70, 72
Kafka, Franz 71
Kahn, Louis 30, 50, 58
Kamppi Centre, Helsinki 82
Kearney, Richard 33
Keller, Helen 47
King, BB 72
Kinkamo, Finland 75
Klein, Melanie 56
Knowledge 10–14
Korundi Cultural Center, Rovaniemi, 
Lapland 81
Kundera, Milan 71
Kuopio, Finland 82
Lacan, Jacques 14
Land artists 30
Lang, Richard 56
Le Corbusier 21, 38, 39, 44, 47, 61
Levinas, Emmanuel 14
Levin, David Michael 11, 13, 24
The Opening of Vision: Nihilism and the 
Postmodern Situation 30
Lewerentz, Sigurd 68
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

101
Lewin, David Michael: Modernity and the 
Hegemony of Vision 11
Libeskind, Daniel 69, 78
‘Life-enhancing’ architecture 4
Loss of plasticity 20–23
Lyotard, Jean-François 14
Mandrou, Robert 19
Marcel, Gabriel 55
Marcuse, Herbert 77
Marimekko 78
Marimekko Shop in Helsinki 70
Materiality/time 25–28
Matisse, Henri 36
McGill University, Montreal 69
Meier, Richard 61
Melnikov House, Moscow 44, 47
Melnikov, Konstantin 44
Memory and imagination, spaces of 60–61
Mendelsohn, Erich 61
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice ix, x, 6, 9, 14, 15, 24, 33, 
35, 36, 38, 39, 56, 69, 85
Michelangelo 60
Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig 23
Mimesis, of body 56–60
Modernism 14, 21
Modernity and the Hegemony of Vision (Lewin)  
11
Moduli 225
industrially produced summerhouse 
system ix, 75
standard joint details 75
Moholy-Nagy, László 21
Montagu, Ashley 4, 31
Moore, Charles W 34
Moore, Henry 55
Multi-sensory experience 34–39
Murcutt, Glenn 31, 72
Muscle and bone images 51–54
Museum of Finnish Architecture, Helsinki 78
Abacus (yearbook) 78
Nakamura, Toshio ix
Narcissistic eye 16–17
Natural materials 25
Nietzsche, Friedrich 9, 14
Nihilistic eye 16–17
Norberg-Schulz, Christian 68
Ocularcentrism, critics of 14–16
Okakura, Kakuzo: The Book of Tea 38
Ong, Walter J 17 31, 42
Oral vs. visual space 17–20
Paimio Sanatorium, Finland 44
Pallasmaa, Juhani 72, 75
adjustable light fitting 74
adjustable reclining chair 73
age of four 66
age of seventy five 66
‘An Architecture of the Seven Senses’ 3
carbon fibre and chromed spring steel 73
chair, prototype, laminated plywood 73
The Embodied Image: Imagination and Imagery in 
Architecture 7, 70
exhibition, in Finland Pavilion 67
The Eyes of the Skin ix, 3, 4, 7, 10–62, 
65–72, 81, 83–85
Marimekko Shop in Helsinki 70
outdoor light fitting 74
prototypes for door handles 67
prototypes for drawer and door pulls 70
Rootedness: reflections for young architects 7
sketches for door pulls 67, 86
sketches for light fixtures 86
staircases for installation 79
‘The Geometry of Feeling’ 79, 84
The Thinking Hand: Existential and Embodied 
Wisdom in Architecture 7, 70
Pantheon, Rome 43
Pérez-Gómez, Alberto ix, 3, 69, 72, 81
Piero della Francesca 67
Plato 10, 23
Poetics 81–86
‘Polemics’ series, Academy Editions 3
Post-Modernism 80
Pritzker Prize Committee 72
Proust, Marcel 50
Rasmussen, Steen Eiler ix, 42, 68
Experiencing Architecture 42, 68
Relph, Edward: Place and Placelessness 33
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

102
Rembrandt van Rijn 39
Renaissance 10, 23, 28 30, 43
Retinal architecture 20–22
Rilke, Rainer Maria 46, 47, 69
The Notebooks of Malte Laurids  
Brigge 47
Rodin, Auguste 48
Rorty, Richard 9
Rovaniemi Art Museum and Concert Hall, 
Korundi, Rovaniemi ix, 81
Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts, 
Copenhagen 3
Ruskin, John 50
Ruusuvuori, Aarno 68, 76, 80
Ryoan-ji Zen Garden, Kyoto, Japan 39
Saarinen, Eliel 65, 76
Salk Institute, La Jolla, California 50
San Francisco 60
Sartre, Jean-Paul 14, 60
Säynätsalo Town Hall, Finland 40
Scarpa, Carlo 51
Scent, spaces of 46–47
Scharoun, Hans 61, 68
Scheler, Max 14
Sedlmayr, Hans 26
Semper, Gottfried 85
Sense, architecture of 61–62
Serra, Richard 30
Shadows,significance of 39–40
SIIDA Sámi Lapp Museum, Inari, Northern 
Lapland 81, 82
Silence, time and solitude 43–44
Siza, Alvaro y 78
Sloterdijk, Peter 10
Sontag, Susan 24
Spitz, René 35
Starobinski, Jean 23
Steiner, Rudolph 35
Stokes, Adrian 42, 50, 68
Stone surface 51
St Peter and St Mark church, 
Klippan, Sweden 68
St Petersburg, Russia 60
Summer studio, of Tor Arne, painter, Vänö 
Islands 83
Sutherland, Graham 56
‘Tactile values’ 36
Tanizaki, Jun’ichirō 51
In Praise of Shadows 39
Third Man, The (film) 43
Thompson, Professor Fred 55
Timeless task, of architecture 62
Tintoretto 60
Touch, shape of 48
Turner, Joseph Mallord William 30, 36
Two-family house Enarvi, Helsinki 83
Utzon, Jorn 68
Valéry, Paul 38
van den Berg, JH 85
van Eyck, Aldo 67
Vertigo (film) 60
Villa Savoye, Poissy, Paris, France 44
Villa Stein-de Monzie, Garches, France  
47
Vision 10–13
Visual images, architecture of 24–25
Visual space, oral vs. 17–18
Vitruvius 85
Wartofsky, Marx W 21
Waters, Muddy 72
Welles, Orson 43
Western architectural theory 20
Wilson, Colin St John 68
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 5
Wright, Frank Lloyd 30, 36, 61, 62
Zumthor, Peter 61
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

103
PICTURE 
CREDITS
PART ONE
1 Out of copyright.
2 Luis Buñuel Estate © LBFI  
2012; © Salvador Dali,  
Fundació Gala-­Salvador Dalí, 
DACS, 2012.
3 Dziga Vertov/The Museum 
of Modern Art, New York/
Scala, Florence.
4 © Stiftung Preussische  
Schlösser und Gärten, 
Berlin-­Brandenburg.
5 Magritte © ADAGP, Paris and 
DACS, London 2011.
6 Bayer © DACS 2011.
7 Corbusier © FLC/ADAGP,  
Paris and DACS, London 2011.
8 Photo: Juhani Pallasmaa.
9 © Ocean/Corbis.
10 © The Aulis Blomstedt Estate/
Severi Blomstedt.
PART TWO
11 © Kunsthistorisches  
Museum with MVK and ÖTM,  
Vienna.
12 Photo: Juhani Pallasmaa.
13 Photo: David Heald.
14 Photo: Juhani Pallasmaa.
15 © 2011 White Images/Scala,  
Florence.
16 © Jose Fuste Raga/Corbis.
17 © 2011 Photo Scala,  
Florence.
18 Museum of Finnish Architecture 
(Photo: István Rácz).
19 State Public Library, Ulan 
Bator, Mongolia.
20 Museum of Finnish Architecture 
(Photo: Heikki Havas).
21 Mairea Foundation (Photo: Rauno 
Träskelin).
The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the Senses, Fourth Edition. Juhani Pallasmaa.
© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. Published 2024 by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

104
22 The Museum of Modern Art, 
New York/Scala, Florence.
23 © Hélène Binet.
24 Mairea Foundation (Photo: Rauno 
Träskelin).
A DOOR HANDLE, 
A HANDSHAKE: AN  
INTRODUCTION 
TO JUHANI  
PALLASMAA AND  
HIS WORK
1 Photographer unknown.
2 Courtesy of Juhani Pallasmaa, 
private archive. Photo: Knut Thyberg.
3 Sketch: Courtesy of Juhani 
Pallasmaa, private archive.
4 Photo: Rauno Träskelin.
5 Photo: Rauno Träskelin.
6 Photo: Rauno Träskelin.
7 Courtesy of Juhani Pallasmaa, 
private archive.
8 Courtesy of Juhani Pallasmaa, private 
archive. Photo: Rauno Träskelin.
9 Photo: Rauno Träskelin.
10 Photo: Rauno Träskelin.
11 Photo: Rauno Träskelin.
12 Photo: Rauno Träskelin.
13 Photo: Kaj Lindholm.
14 Courtesy of Juhani Pallasmaa, 
private archive.
15 Courtesy of Juhani Pallasmaa, 
private archive.
16 Sketch: Courtesy of Juhani 
Pallasmaa, private archive.
17 Photo: Rauno Träskelin.
18 Photo: Rauno Träskelin.
19 Courtesy Juhani Pallasmaa 
Architects, Helsinki. Photo: Rauno 
Träskelin.
20 Photo: Rauno Träskelin.
21 Courtesy Juhani Pallasmaa 
Architects, Helsinki. Photo: Gérard  
Dufresne.
22 Courtesy Juhani Pallasmaa 
Architects, Helsinki. Photo: Balthazar  
Korab.
23 Photo: Juhani Pallasmaa.
24 Photo: Kari Hakli.
25 Sketch: Courtesy of Juhani 
Pallasmaa, private archive.
26 Sketch: Courtesy of Juhani 
Pallasmaa, private archive.
 Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [13/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License