CONSTRUCTION
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

This page intentionally left blank 
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

At this stage, you have a complete design for an indi-
vidual building. If you have followed the patterns given,
you have a scheme of spaces, either marked on the
ground^ with stakes, or on a 'piece of 'paper, accurate to
the nearest foot or so. You know the height of rooms,
the rough size and position of windows and doors, and
you know roughly how the roofs of the building, and
the gardens are laid out.
The next, and last part of the language, tells you how
to make a buildable building directly from this rough
scheme of spaces, and tells you how to build it, in detail.
The patterns in this last section present a physical atti-
tude to construction that works together with the kinds of
buildings which the second part of the pattern language
generates. These construction patterns are intended for
builders—whether professional builders, or amateur
owner-builders.
Each pattern states a principle about structure and
materials. These principles can be implemented in any
number of ways when it comes time for actual building.
We have tried to state various ways in which the prin-
ciples can be built. But, partly because these patterns are
the least developed, and partly because of the nature of
building patterns, the reader will very likely have much
to add to these patterns. For example, the actual mate-
rials used to implement them will vary greatly from
region to region . . .
Perhaps the main thing to bear in mind, as you look
over this material, is this: Our intention in this section
935
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
has been to provide an alternative to the technocratic and
rigid ways of building that have become the legacy of
the machine age and modern architecture.
The way of building described here leads to buildings
that are unique and tailored to their sites. It depends on
builders taking responsibility for their workj and work-
ing out the details of the building as they go—mocking
up entrances and windows and the dimensions of spaces,
making experiments, and building directly according to
the results.
The patterns in this section are unique in several ways.
First, the sequence of the patterns is more concrete
than in any of the earlier portions of the language. It
not only corresponds to the order in which a design
matures conceptually y in the user's mind, but also cor-
responds to the actual physical order of construction.
That is, except for the first four patterns, which deal
with structural philosophy, the remaining patterns can
actually be used, in the sequence given, to build a build-
ing. The sequence of the language corresponds almost
exactly, to the actual sequence of operations on the build-
ing site. In addition, the patterns themselves in this sec-
tion are both more concrete, and more abstract, than any
other patterns in the language.
They are more concrete because, with each pattern, we
have always given at least one interpretation which can
be built directly. For instance, with the pattern ROOT
FOUNDATION, we have given one particular interpreta-
tion, to show that it can be done, and also to give the
reader an immediate, and practical, buildable approach
to construction.
936
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.act
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
Yet at the same time, they are also more abstract. The
particular concrete formulation which we have given for
each pattern, can also be interpreted, and remade in a
thousand ways. Thus, it is also possible to take the gen-
eral idea of the pattern, the idea that the foundation
functions like a tree root, in the way that it anchors the
building in the ground—and invent a dozen entirely dif-
ferent physical systems, which all work in this funda-
mental way. In this sense, these patterns are more ab-
stract than any others in the book, since they have a
wider range of possible interpretations.
To illustrate the fact that a great variety of actual
building systems can be developed, based on these pat-
terns, we present three versions that we have developed,
in response to different contexts.
In Mexico: Concrete block foundations with re-bar
connectors j hollow self-aligning molded earth blocks re-
inforced with bamboo for walls and columns j burlap
formed concrete beams j steep barrel vaults with earth
and asphalt covering—everything whitewashed.
In Peru: Slab floors poured integrally with wall foun-
dations j finished with soft baked tiles j hard wood
(diablo fuerte) columns and beams j plaster on bamboo
lath acting as shear walls between columns j diagonal
wood plank ceiling/floors j bamboo lattice partitions.
In Berkeley: Concrete slab finished with colored waxj
walls of exterior skin of i x boards and interior skin of
gypboard filled with light weight concrete j box columns
made of i x boards, filled with lightweight concrete j
2-inch concrete ceiling/floor vaults formed with wood
lattice and burlap forms.
937
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
As you can see from these examples, we have formu-
lated these patterns with very careful attention to cost.
We have tried to give examples of these patterns which
use the cheapest, and most easily available, materials;
we have designed them in such a way that such buildings
can be built by lay people (who can therefore avoid the
cost of labor altogether) j and we have designed it so
that the cost of labor, if done professionally, is also low.
Of the three parts of the language, this third part is
the least developed. Both the part on Towns and the
part on Buildings have been tested, one partially, the
other very thoroughly, in practice. This third part has
so far only been tested in a small number of relatively
minor buildings. That means, obviously, that this mate-
rial needs a good deal of improvement.
However, we intend, as soon as possible, to test all
these patterns thoroughly in various different buildings
—houses, public buildings, details, and additions. Once
again, as soon as we have enough examples to make it
worth reporting on them, we shall publish another vol-
ume which describes them, and our findings.
In many ways, rough though it is, this is the most
exciting part of the language, because it is here, in these
few patterns, that we can most vividly see a building
literally grow before our eyes, under the impact of the
patterns.
The actual process of construction, in which the se-
quence of their patterns creates a building, is described
in chapter 23 of The Timeless Way.
938
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

Before you lay out construction detailsy establish a
'philosophy of structure which will let the structure
grow directly from your flans and your conception
of the buildings.
205. 
STRUCTURE FOLLOWS
SOCIAL SPACES
206. EFFICIENT STRUCTURE
207. GOOD MATERIALS
208. GRADUAL STIFFENING
939
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2O5 STRUCTURE FOLLOWS
SOCIAL SPACES**
940
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . if you have used the- earlier patterns in the language, your
plans are based on subtle arrangements of social spaces. But the
beauty and subtlety of all these social spaces will be destroyed,
when you start building, unless you find a way of building which
is able to follow the social spaces without distorting or re-
arranging them for engineering reasons.
This pattern gives you *the beginning of such a way of build-
ing. It is the first of the 4.9 patterns which deal specifically with
structure and construction; it is the bottleneck through which
all languages pass from the larger patterns for rooms and building
layout to the smaller ones which specify the process of construc-
tion. It not only has its own intrinsic arguments about the rela-
tion between social spaces and load-bearing structure—it also
contains, at the end, a list of all the connections which you need
for patterns on structure, columns, walls, floors, roofs, and all the
details of construction.
No building ever feels right to the people in it unless
the physical spaces (defined by columns, walls, and ceilings)
are congruent with the social spaces (defined by activities
and human groups).
And yet this congruence is hardly ever present in modern
construction. Most often the physical and social spaces are incon-
gruent. Modern construction—that is, the form of construction
most commonly practiced 
in the mid-twentieth 
century—
usually forces social spaces into the framework of a building whose
shape is given by engineering considerations.
There are two different versions of this incongruence.
On the one hand, there are those buildings whose structural
form is very demanding indeed and actually forces the social space
to follow the shape of the construction—Buckminster Fuller
domes, hyperbolic paraboloids, tension structures are examples.
On the other hand, there are those buildings in which there
are very few structural elements—a few giant columns and no
941
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
Geodesic dome.
Steel and glass.
more. In these buildings the social spaces are defined by light-
weight nonstructural partitions floating free within the "neutral"
physical structure given by the engineering. The buildings of
Mies van der Rohe and Skidmore Owings and Merrill are ex-
amples.
We shall now argue that both these kinds of incongruence
do fundamental damage—for entirely different reasons.
In the first case the structure does damage simply because it
constrains the social space and makes it different from what it
naturally wants to be. To be specific: we know from our experi-
ments that people are able to use this pattern language to design
buildings for themselves; and that the plans they create, un-
hampered by other considerations, have an astonishing range of
free arrangements, always finely tuned to the details of their lives
and habits.
User's house -plan.
942
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2O5 
STRUCTURE FOLLOWS SOCIAL SPACES
Any form of construction which makes it impossible to imple-
ment these plans and forces them into the strait jacket of an alien
geometry, simply for structural reasons, is doing social damage.
Of course, it could be argued that the structural needs of a
building are as much a part of its nature as the social and psy-
chological needs of its inhabitants. This argument might perhaps,
perhaps, hold water if there were indeed no way of building
buildings which conform more exactly to the loose plans based
on activities alone.
But the next jew 'patterns in this book make it very clear that
there do exist ways of building which are structurally sound
and yet perfectly congruent with social space, without any com-
-promise whatever. It is therefore clear that we may legitimately
reject any form of construction which cannot adapt itself per-
fectly to the forms of space required by social action.
What of the second kind of incongruence between social space
and building form—the kind where the structure creates huge
areas of almost uninterrupted "flexible" space, punctuated by
occasional columns, and the social spaces are created inside this
framework by nonstructural partitions.
Once again, many important patterns cannot be incorporated
into the design—LIGHT ON TWO SIDES OF EVERY ROOM (159), for
example simply cannot be included in a giant rectangle. But in
this type of building, there is an additional kind of incongruence
between social space and engineering structure which comes from
the fact that the two are virtually independent of each other.
The engineering follows its own laws, the social space follows its
laws—and they do not match.
This mismatch is perceived and felt not merely as a mismatch,
but as a fundamental and disturbing incoherence in the fabric of
the building, which makes people feel uneasy and unsure of them-
selves and their relation to the world. We offer four possible
explanations.
First: the spaces called for by the patterns dealing with social
and psychological needs are critical. If the spaces are not right,
the needs are not met and problems are not solved. Since these
spaces are so critical, it stands to reason that they must be felt as
real spaces, not flimsily or haphazardly partitioned spaces, which
943
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
only pay lip-service to the needs people experience. For instance,
if an entrance room is created with flimsy partitions, it will not
take hold; people won't take it seriously. Only when the most
solid elements of the building form the spaces will the spaces be
fully felt and the needs which call for the space then fully be
satisfied.
Second: a building will also seem alien unless it gives to its
users a direct and intuitive sense of its structure—how it is put
together. Buildings where the structure is hidden leave yet another
gap in people's understanding of the environment around them.
We know this is important to children and suspect it must be
important to adults too.
Third: when the social space has, as its own surrounding, the
fabric of the load-bearing structure which supports that space,
then the forces of gravity are integrated with the social forces,
and one feels the resolution of all the forces which are acting in
this one space. The experience of being in a place where the
forces are resolved together at once is completely restful and
whole. It is like sitting under an oak tree: things in nature resolve
all the forces acting on them together: they are, in this sense,
whole and balanced.
Fourth: it is a psychological fact that a space is defined by its
corners. Just as four dots define a rectangle to your eye, so four
posts (or more) define an imaginary space between them.
Four •points make a rectangle.
This is the most fundamental way in which solids define space.
Unless the actual solids which make up the building lie at the
corners of its social spaces, they must, instead, be creating other
virtual spaces at odds with the intended ones. The building will
only be at rest psychologically if the corners of its rooms are
clearly marked and coincide, at least in the majority of cases,
with its most solid elements.
944
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2O5 
STRUCTURE FOLLOWS SOCIAL SPACES
Therefore:
A first principle of construction: on no account allow
the engineering to dictate the building's form. Place the
load bearing elements—the columns and the walls and
floors—according to the social spaces of the building; never
modify the social spaces to conform to the engineering struc-
ture of the building.
You will be able to guarantee that structure follows social
spaces by placing columns at the corner of every social space—
COLUMNS AT THE CORNERS (212); and by building a distinct
and separate vault over each room and social space—FLOOR-
CEILING VAULTS (219).
For the principles of structure which will make it possible to
build your building according to this pattern, begin with EFFI-
CIENT STRUCTURE (206) ; for the class of compatible materials,
see GOOD MATERIALS (207) j for the fundamentals of the process
of construction, see GRADUAL STIFFENING (208). . . .
94-5
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

946
20)6 EFFICIENT STRUCTURE*
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . this pattern complements the pattern STRUCTURE FOLLOWS
SOCIAL SPACES (205). Where that pattern defines the relationship
between the social spaces and the structure, this pattern lays
down the kind of structure which is dictated by pure engineering.
As you will see, it is compatible with STRUCTURE FOLLOWS SO-
CIAL SPACES, and will help to create it.
Some buildings have column and beam structures; others
have load-bearing walls with slab floors; others are vaulted
structures, or domes, or tents. But which of these, or what
mixture of them, is actually the most efficient? What is the
best way to distribute materials throughout a building, so
as to enclose the space, strongly and well, with the least
amount of material?
Engineers usually say that there is no answer to this question.
According to current engineering practice it is first necessary to
make an arbitrary choice among the basic possible systems—and
only then possible to use theory and calculation to fix the size of
members within the chosen system. But, the basic choice itself—
at least according to prevailing dogma—cannot be made by theory.
To anyone with an enquiring mind, this seems quite unlikely.
That such a fundamental choice, as the choice between column
and beams systems and load-bearing wall systems and vaulted
systems, should lie purely in the realm of whim—and that the
possible myriad of mixed systems, which lie between these arche-
types, cannot even be considered—all this has more to do with
the status of available theory than with any fundamental insight.
Indeed, as we shall now try to show, the archetypal, best solu-
tion to the problem of efficient structure in a building is one
which does lie in between the three most famous archetypes. It
is a system of load-bearing walls, supported at frequent intervals
by thickened stiffeners like columns, and floored and roofed by a
system of vaults.
We shall derive the character of the most efficient structure in
947
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
three steps. First, we shall define the three-dimensional charac-
ter of a typical system of rooms and spaces in a building. We
shall then define an efficient structure as the smallest cheapest
amount of stable material, placed only in the interstices between
the rooms, which can support itself and the loads which the rooms
generate. Finally, we shall obtain the details of an efficient struc-
ture. For a similar discussion, see Christopher Alexander, "An at-
tempt to derive the nature of a human building system from
first principles," in Edward Allen, The Responsive House,
M.I.T. Press, 1974.
7. The three-dimensional character of a typical building
based purely on the social spaces and the character
of rooms.
In order to obtain this from fundamental considerations, let us
first review the typical shape of rooms—see THE SHAPE OF INDOOR
SPACE (191)—and then go on to derive the most efficient struc-
ture for a building made up of these kinds of rooms:
1. The boundary of any space, seen in plan, is formed by
segments which are essentially straight lines—though they need
not be perfectly straight.
2. The ceiling heights of spaces vary according to their social
functions. Roughly speaking, the ceiling heights vary with floor
areas—large spaces have higher ceilings, small ones lower—
CEILING HEIGHT VARIETY (190) .
3. The edges of the space are essentially vertical up to head
height—that is, about 6 feet. Above head height, the boundaries
of the space may come in toward the space. The upper corners
between wall and ceiling of a normal room serve no function, and
it is therefore not useful to consider them as an essential part of
the space.
4. Each space has a horizontal floor.
5. A building then is a packing of polygonal spaces in which
each polygon has a beehive cross section, and a height which
varies according to its size.
If we follow the principle of STRUCTURE FOLLOWS SOCIAL
SPACES (205), we may assume that this three-dimensional array of
spaces must remain intact, and not be interrupted by structural
948
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2O6 
EFFICIENT STRUCTURE
A -packing of -polygonal beehive spaces.
elements. This means that an efficient structure must be one of
the arrangements of material which occupies only the interstices
between the spaces.
We may visualize the crudest of these possible structures by
means of a simple imaginary process. Make a lump of wax for
each of the spaces which appears in the building, and construct a
three-dimensional array of these lumps of wax, leaving gaps be-
tween all adjacent lumps. Now, take a generalized "structure
fluid," and pour it all over this arrangements of lumps, so that it
completely covers the whole thing, and fills all the gaps. Let this
fluid harden. Now dissolve out the wax lumps that represent
spaces. The stuff which remains is the most generalized building
structure.
II. The most efficient 
structure for a given system
of spaces.
Obviously, the imaginary structure made from the structure
fluid is not real. And besides, it is rather inefficient: it would, if
actually carried out, use a great deal of material. We must now
ask how to make a structure, similar to this imaginary one, but
one which uses the smallest amount of material. As we shall see,
this most efficient structure will be a compression structure, in
which bending and tension are reduced to a minimum and a
continuous structure, in which all members are rigidly connected
in such a way that each member carries at least some part of the
stresses caused by any pattern of loading.
I. A compression structure. In an efficient structure, we want
every ounce of material to be working to its capacity. In more
precise terms, we want the stress distributed throughout the
materials in such a way that every cubic inch is stressed to the
same degree. This is not happening, for example, in a simple
wooden beam. The material is most stressed at the top and bottom
949
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
of the beam; the middle of the beam has only very low stresses,
because there is too much material there relative to the stress
distribution.
As a general rule, we may say that members which are in
bending always have uneven stress distributions and that we can
therefore only distribute stresses evenly throughout the materials
if the structure is entirely free of bending. In short, then, a
perfectly efficient structure must be free of bending.
There are two possible structures which avoid bending alto-
gether: pure tension structures and pure compression structures.
Although pure tension structures are theoretically interesting
and suitable for occasional special purposes, the considerations
described in 
GOOD MATERIALS (207) 
rule them out 
over-
whelmingly on the grounds that tension materials are hard to
obtain, and expensive, while almost all materials can resist com-
pression. Note especially that wood and steel, the two principle
tension materials in buildings, are both scarce, and can—on
ecological grounds—no longer be used in bulk—again, see GOOD
MATERIALS (207).
2. A continuous structure. In an efficient structure, it is not
only true that individual elements have even stress distributions
in them when they are loaded. It is also true that the structure
acts as a whole.
Consider, for example, the case of a basket. The individual
strands of the basket are weak. By itself no one strand can resist
much load. But the basket is so cunningly made, that all the
strands work together to resist even the smallest load. If you press
on one part of the basket with your finger, all the strands in the
basket—even those in the part furthest from your finger—work
together to resist the load. And of course, since the whole struc-
ture works as one, to resist the load, no one part has, individually,
to be very strong.
This principle is particularly important in a structure like a
building, which faces a vast range of different loading conditions.
At one minute, the wind is blowing very strong in one direction;
at another moment an earthquake shakes the building; in later
years, uneven settlement redistributes dead loads because some
foundations sink lower than others; and, of course, throughout
its life the people and furniture in the building are moving
950
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2O6 
EFFICIENT STRUCTURE
all the time. If each element is to be strong enough, by itself, to
resist the maximum load it can be subjected to, it will have to
be enormous.
But when the building is continuous, like a basket, so that each
part of the building helps to carry the smallest load, then, of
course, the unpredictable nature of the loads creates no difficul-
ties at all. Members can be quite small, because no matter what
the loads are, the continuity of the building will distribute them
among the members as a whole, and the building will act as a
whole against them.
The continuity of a building depends on its connections:
actual continuity of material and shape. It is very hard, almost
impossible, to make continuous connections between different ma-
terials, which transfer load as efficiently as a continuous material;
and it is therefore essential that the building be made of one
material, which is actually continuous from member to member.
And the shape of the connections between elements is vital too.
Right angles tend to create discontinuities: forces can be dis-
tributed throughout the building only if there are diagonal fillets
wherever walls meet ceilings, walls meet walls, and columns
meet beams.
///. 
The details of an efficient 
structure.
If we assume now that an efficient building will be both com-
pressive and continuous, we can obtain the main morphological
features of its structure by direct inference.
i. Its ceilings, floors, and rooms must all be vaulted. This
follows directly. The dome or vault shape is the only shape which
works in pure compression. Floors and roofs can only be con-
tinuous with walls, if they curve downward at their edges. And
the shape of social spaces also invites it directly—since the tri-
angle of space between the wall and ceiling serves no useful
purpose, it is a natural place for structural material.
Vaults.
951
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
3. Walls must all be load-bearing. Any non load-bearing par-
tition evidently contradicts the principle of continuity which
says that every particle of the building is helping to resist loads.
Furthermore, columns with non load-bearing partitions be-
tween them need shear support. The wall provides it naturally;
and the continuity of the walls, floor, and ceiling can only be
created by the action of a wall that ties them together.
Load-bearing walls.
3. Walls must be stiffened 
at intervals along their length by
columnar ribs. If a wall is to contain a given amount of material,
then the wall acts most efficiently when its material is redis-
tributed, nonhomogeneously, to form vertical ribs. This wall is
most efficient in resisting buckling—indeed, at most thicknesses
this kind of stiffening is actually required to let the wall act at its
full compressive capacity—see 
FINAL 
COLUMN 
DISTRIBUTION
(213). And it helps to resist horizontal loads, because the
stiffeners act as beams against the horizontal forces.
Vertical 
stiffeners.
4. Connections between walls and floors, and between walls
and walls, must all be thickened by extra material that jorms a
•fillet along the seam. Connections are the weakest points for con-
tinuity, and right-angled connections are the worst. However, we
know from THE SHAPE OF INDOOR SPACE (191) that we cannot
avoid rough right angles where walls meet walls; and of course,
there must be rough right angles where walls meet floors. To
counteract the effect of the right angle, it is necessary to "fill"
the angle with material. This principle is discussed under COLUMN
CONNECTIONS (227).
952
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2O6 
EFFICIENT STRUCTURE
Thickened connections.
5. Openings in walls must have thickened frames, and round-
ing in the uffer corners. This follows directly from the principle
of continuity and is fully discussed in FRAMES AS THICKENED
EDGES(225).
Openings.
Therefore:
Conceive the building as a building made from one con-
tinuous body of compressive material. In its geometry, con-
ceive it as a three-dimensional system of individually
vaulted spaces, most of them roughly rectangular; with thin
load-bearing walls, each stiffened by columns at intervals
along its length, thickened where walls meet walls and
where walls meet vaults and stiffened around the openings.
953
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
The layout of the inner vaults is given in FLOOR AND CEILING
LAYOUT (210) and FLOOR-CEILING 
VAULTS (219); the layout
of the outer vaults which form the roof is given in ROOF LAYOUT
(209) and ROOF VAULTS (220). The layout of the stiffeners
which make the walls is given in FINAL COLUMN DISTRIBUTION
(213); the layout of the thickening where walls meet walls is
given by COLUMNS AT THE CORNERS (212); the thickening
where walls meet vaults is given by PERIMETER BEAMS (217);
the construction of the columns and the walls is given by BOX
COLUMNS (216) and WALL MEMBRANES (218); the thickening of
doors and window frames is given by FRAMES AS THICKENED
EDGES (225); and the non-right-angled connection 
between
columns and beams by COLUMN CONNECTION (227). . . .
954
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

955
2O7 GOOD MATERIALS**
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . the principles of structure allow you to imagine a building
in which materials are distributed in the most efficient way,
congruent with the social spaces given by the plan—STRUCTURE
FOLLOWS SOCIAL SPACES (205), EFFICIENT STRUCTURE (206).
But of course the structural conception is still only schematic. It
can only become firm and cogent in your mind when you know
what materials the building will be made of. This pattern helps
you settle on materials.
There is a fundamental conflict in the nature of materials
for building in industrial society.
On the one hand, an organic building requires materials which
consist of hundreds of small pieces, put together, each one of
them hand cut, each one shaped to be unique according to its
position. On the other hand, the high cost of labor, and the ease
of mass production, tend to create materials which are large,
identical, not cuttable or modifiable, and not adaptable to idiosyn-
cracies of plan. These "modern" materials tend to destroy the
organic quality of natural buildings and, indeed, to make it
impossible. In addition, modern materials tend to be flimsy and
hard to maintain—so that buildings deteriorate more rapidly
than in a pre-industrial society where a building can be main-
tained and improved for hundreds of years by patient attention.
The central problem of materials, then, is to find a collection
of materials which are small in scale, easy to cut on site, easy to
work on site without the aid of huge and expensive machinery,
easy to vary and adapt, heavy enough to be solid, longlasting or
easy to maintain, and yet easy to build, not needing specialized
labor, not expensive in labor, and universally obtainable and
cheap.
Furthermore, this class of good materials must be ecologically
sound: biodegradable, low in energy consumption, and not based
on depletable resources.
When we take all these requirements together, they suggest a
956
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2O7 
GOOD MATERIALS
rather startling class of "good materials"—quite different from
the materials in common use today. The following discussion is
our attempt to begin to define this class of materials. It is cer-
tainly incomplete; but perhaps it can help you to think through
the problem of materials more carefully.
We start with what we call "bulk materials"—the materials
that occur in the greatest volume in a given building. They may
account for as much as 80 per cent of the total volume of ma-
terials used in a building. Traditionally, bulk materials have
been earth, concrete, wood, brick, stone, snow. . . . Today the
bulk materials are essentially wood and concrete and, in the
very large buildings, steel.
When we analyze these materials strictly, according to our
criteria, we find that stone and brick meet most of the require-
ments, but are often out of the question where labor is expensive,
because they are labor intensive.
Wood is excellent in many ways. Where it is available people
use it in great quantities, and where it is not available people
are trying to get hold of it. Unfortunately the forests have been
terribly managed; many have been devastated; and the price of
heavy lumber has skyrocketed. From today's paper: "Since the
end of federal economic controls the price of lumber has been
jumping about 15 percent a month and is now about 55 percent
above what it was a year ago." San Francisco Chronicle, Febru-
ary II, 1973. We shall therefore look upon wood as a precious
material, which should not be used as a bulk material or for
structural purposes.
Steel as a bulk material seems out of the question. We do not
need it for high buildings since they do not make social sense—
FOUR-STORY LIMIT (21). And for smaller buildings it is expen-
sive, impossible to modify, high energy in production.
Earth is an interesting bulk material. But it is hard to stabilize,
and it makes incredibly heavy walls because it has to be so thick.
Where this is appropriate, and where the earth is available, how-
ever, it is certainly one of the "good materials."
Regular concrete is too dense. It is heavy and hard to work.
After it sets one cannot cut into it, or nail into it. And its surface
is ugly, cold, and hard in feeling, unless covered by expensive
finishes not integral to the structure.
957
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
And yet concrete, in some form, is a fascinating material. It
is fluid, strong, and relatively cheap. It is available in almost every
part of the world. A University of California professor of engi-
neering sciences, P. Kumar Mehta, has even just recently found
a way of converting abandoned rice husks into Portland ce-
ment.
Is there any way of combining all these good qualities of con-
crete and also having a material which is light in weight, easy to
work, with a pleasant finish ? There is. It is possible to use a whole
range of ultra-lightweight concretes which have a density and
comfressive strength very similar to that of wood. They are easy
to work with, can be nailed with ordinary nails, cut with a saw,
drilled with wood-working tools, easily repaired.
We believe that ultra-lightweight concrete is one of the most
fundamental bulk materials of the juture.
To make this as clear as possible, we shall now discuss the
range of lightweight concretes. Our experiments lead us to be-
lieve that the best lightweight concretes, the ones most useful
for building, are those whose densities lie in the range of 40 to 60
pounds per cubic foot and which develop some 600 to IOOO psi
in compression.
Oddly enough, this particular specification lies in the least
developed part of the presently available range of concretes. As
we can see from the following diagram, the so-called "structural"
concretes are usually more dense (at least 90 pounds per cubic
foot) and much stronger. The most common "lightweight"
concretes use vermiculite as an aggregate, are used for under-
flooring and insulation, and are very light, but they do not
usually develop enough strength to be structurally useful—most
Currently available concrete mixes.
958
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2O7 
GOOD MATERIALS
often about 300 psi in compression. However, a range of mixed
lightweight aggregates, containing vermiculite, perlite, pumice,
and expanded shale in different proportions, can easily generate
40—60 pound, 600 psi concretes anywhere in the world. We have
had very good luck with a mix of 1-2-3: cement-kylite-vermicu-
lite.
Beyond the bulk materials, there are the materials used in
relatively smaller quantities for framework, surfaces, and finishes.
These are the "secondary" materials.
When buildings are built with manageable secondary materials,
they can be repaired with the same materials: repair becomes
continuous with the original building. And the buildings are
more apt to be repaired if it is easy to do so and if the user can
do it himself bit by bit without having to rely on skilled workers
or special equipment. With prefabricated materials this is im-
possible, the materials are inherently unrepairable. When pre-
fabricated finish materials are damaged they must be replaced
with an entirely new component.
Take the case of a garden patio. It can be made as a continu-
ous concrete slab. When the ground shifts slightly underneath this
slab, the slab cracks and buckles. This is quite unrepairable for the
user. It requires that the entire slab be brbken out (which re-
quires relatively heavy-duty equipment) and replaced—by pro-
fessional skilled labor. On the other hand, it would have been
possible to build the patio initially out of many small bricks,
tiles, or stones. When the ground shifts, the user is then able to
lift up the broken tiles, add some more earth, and replace the
tile—all without the aid of expensive machinery or professional
help. And if one of the tiles or bricks becomes damaged, it can
be easily replaced.
What are the good secondary materials? Wood, which we want
to avoid as a bulk material, is excellent as a secondary material
for doors, finishes, windows, furniture. Plywood, particle board,
and gypsum board,can all be cut, nailed, trimmed, and are rela-
tively cheap. Bamboo, thatch, plaster, paper, corrugated metals,
chicken wire, canvas, cloth, vinyl, rope, slate, fiberglass, non-
chlorinated plastics are all examples of secondary materials which
do rather well against our criteria. Some are dubious ecologically
—that is, the fiberglass and the corrugated metals—but again,
959
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
these sheet materials need only be used in moderation, to form
and finish and trim the bulk materials.
Finally, there are some materials which our criteria exclude
entirely—either as bulk or secondary materials. They are expen-
sive, hard to adapt to idiosyncratic plans, they require high
energy production techniques, they are in limited reserves. . . .
for example: steel panels and rolled steel sections; aluminum;
hard and prestressed concrete; chlorinated foams; structural
lumber; cement plaster; immense sections of plate glass. . . .
And, for any optimist who thinks he can go on using steel
reinforcing bars forever—consider the following fact. Even iron,
abundant as it is all over the earth's surface, is a depletable re-
source. If consumption keeps growing at its present rate of in-
crease (as it very well may, given the vast parts of the world not
yet using resources at American and western consumption levels),
the resources of iron will run out in 2050.
Years at which various metals will be depleted assuming
current usage rate continues to increase as it did between
1060 and 1068.
Therefore:
Use only biodegradable, low energy consuming materials,
which are easy to cut and modify on site. For bulk mate-
rials we suggest ultra-lightweight 40-60 Ibs. concrete and
earth-based materials like tamped earth, brick, and tile. For
secondary materials, use wood planks, gypsum, plywood,
cloth, chickenwire, paper, cardboard, particle board, cor-
rugated iron, lime plasters, bamboo, rope, and tile.
960
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2O7 
GOOD MATERIALS
ultra-light weight concrete or organic or earth-based materials
In GRADUAL STIFFENING (208), we shall work out the way of
using these materials that goes with STRUCTURE FOLLOWS SOCIAL
SPACES (205) and EFFICIENT STRUCTURE (206). Try to use
the materials in such a way as to allow their own texture to show
themselves—LAPPED OUTSIDE WALLS (234), SOFT INSIDE WALLS
(235)
961
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2O8 GRADUAL STIFFENING**
962
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . in STRUCTURE FOLLOWS SOCIAL SPACES (205) and EFFI-
CIENT STRUCTURE (206) we have set down the beginnings of a
philosophy, an approach, to construction. GOOD MATERIALS (207)
tells us something about the materials we ought to use in order
to meet human and ecological demands. Now, before we start the
practical task of making a structural layout for a building, it is
necessary to consider one more philosophical pattern: one which
defines the process of construction that will make it possible to
use the right materials and get the overall conception of the
structure right.
The fundamental philosophy behind the use of pattern
languages is that buildings should be uniquely adapted to
individual needs and sites; and that the plans of buildings
should be rather loose and fluid, in order to accommodate
these subtleties.
This requires an entirely new attitude toward the process of
construction. We may define this attitude by saying that it is
desirable to build a building in such a way that it starts out
loose and flimsy while final adaptations in plan are made, and
then gets stiffened gradually during the process of construction,
so that each additional act of construction makes the structure
sounder.
To understand this philosophy properly, it is helpful to imagine
a building being made like a basket. A few strands are put in
place. They are very flimsy. Other strands are woven in. Grad-
ually the basket gets stiffer and stiffer. Its final structural
strength is only reached from the cooperation of all the members,
and is not reached until the building is completely finished. In
this sense, such a process produces a building in which all parts
of it are working structurally—see EFFICIENT STRUCTURE (206).
Why does the principle of gradual stiffening seem so sensible
as a process of building?
To begin with, such a structure allows the actual building
process to be a creative act. It allows the building to be built up
963
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
gradually. Members can be moved around before they are firmly
in place. All those detailed design decisions which can never be
worked out in advance on paper, can be made during the build-
ing process. And it allows you to see the space in three dimen-
sions as a whole, each step of the way, as more material is added.
This means that since each new material that is added in the
process must adapt perfectly to the framework that is there, each
new material must be more adaptable, more flexible, more capable
of coping with variation, than the last. Thus, though the building
as a whole goes from flimsy to strong, the actual materials that
are added go from the strongest and stiffest, to the gradually
less stiff, until finally fluid materials are added.
The essence of this process is very fundamental indeed. We
may understand it best by comparing the work of a fifty-year-old
carpenter with the work of a novice. The experienced carpenter
keeps going. He doesn't have to keep stopping, because every
action he performs, is calculated in such a way that some later
action can put it right to the extent that it is imperfect now.
What is critical here, is the sequence of events. The carpenter
never takes a step which he cannot correct later; so he can keep
working, confidently, steadily.
The novice, by comparison, spends a great deal of his time
trying to figure out what to do. He does this essentially because
he knows that an action he takes now may cause unretractable
problems a little further down the linej and if he is not careful,
he will find himself with a joint that requires the shortening of
some crucial member—at a stage when it is too late to shorten
that member. The fear of these kinds of mistakes forces him to
spend hours trying to figure ahead: and it forces him to work
as far as possible to exact drawings because they will guarantee
that he avoids these kinds of mistakes.
The difference between the novice and the master is simply
that the novice has not learnt, yet, how to do things in such a
way that he can afford to make small mistakes. The master
knows that the sequence of his actions will always allow him to
cover his mistakes a little further down the line. It is this simple
but essential knowledge which gives the work of a master car-
penter its wonderful, smooth, relaxed, and almost 
uncon-
cerned simplicity.
964
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2O8 
GRADUAL STIFFENING
In a building we have exactly the same problem, only greatly
magnified. Essentially, most modern construction has the charac-
ter of the novice's work, not of the master's. The builders do
not know how to be relaxed, how to deal with earlier mistakes
by later detailing; they do not know the proper sequence of
events; and they do not, usually, have a building system, or a
construction process, which allows them to develop this kind of
relaxed and casual wisdom. Instead, like the novice, they work
exactly to finely detailed drawings; the building is extremely
uptight as it gets made; any departure from the exact drawings
is liable to cause severe problems, may perhaps make it necessary
to pull out whole sections of the work.
This novice-like and panic-stricken attention to detail has two
very serious results. First, like the novice, the architects spend a
great deal of time trying to work things out ahead of time, not
smoothly building. Obviously, this costs money; and helps create
these machine-like "perfect" buildings. Second, a vastly more seri-
ous consequence: the details control the whole. The beauty and
subtlety of the plan in which patterns have held free sway over
the design suddenly becomes tightened and destroyed because,
in fear that details won't work out, the details of connections, and
components, are allowed to control the plan. As a result, rooms
get to be slightly the wrong shape, windows go out of position,
spaces between doors and walls get altered just enough to make
them useless. In a word, the whole character of modern architec-
ture, namely the control of larger space by piddling details of
construction, takes over.
What is needed is the opposite—a process in which details
are fitted to the whole. This is the secret of the master carpenter;
it is described in detail in The Timeless Way of Building as
the foundation of all organic form and all successful building.
The process of gradual stiffening, which we describe here, is the
physical and procedural embodiment of this essential principle.
We now ask how, in practice, it is possible to create a gradually
stiffened structure within the context defined by the pattern
GOOD MATERIALS (207).
Facts about materials give us the starting point we need,
jr. Sheet materials are easy to produce and make the best con-
nections.
965
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
In traditional society there are few sheet materials. However,
factory production tends to make sheets more easily than other
forms of material. As we move into an age of mass production,
sheet materials become plentiful and are naturally strong, light,
and cheap. Gypsum board, plywood, cloth, vinyl, canvas, fiberglass,
particle board, wood planks, corrugated metals, chicken wire, are
all examples.
And sheet materials are the strongest for connections. Con-
nections are the weak points in a structure. Sheet materials are
easy to connect, because connections can join surfaces to one
another. Anything made out of sheets is inherently stronger than
something made of lumps or sticks.
2. Ultra-lightweight concrete is an excellent •fill material—
it has the density of wood, is strong, light, easy to cut, easy to
refair, easy to nail into—and is available everywhere. This is
discussed fully in GOOD MATERIALS (207).
3. However, any kind of concrete needs jormwork; and the
cost of jormwork is enormous.
This makes it very expensive indeed to build any complex
form; and within conventional building systems, it more or less
rules out the kind of "organic" structure which we have described.
Furthermore, in regular concrete work, the formwork is eventu-
ally wasted, thrown away.
We believe that the finishes in any sensible building system
should be integral with the process of construction and the struc-
ture itself (as they are in almost all traditional buildings)—
and that any building system in which finishes have to be
"added" to the building are wasteful, and unnatural.
4. We therejore frofose 
that ultra-lightweight concrete be
-poured into forms which are made of the easily available sheet
materials: and that these materials are then left in place to form
the finish.
The sheet materials can be any combination of cloth, canvas,
wood planks, gypsum boards, fiberboards, plywood, paper, plastered
chickenwire, corrugated metals, and where it is possible, tile,
brick, or stone—see GOOD MATERIALS (207). For the ultra-light-
weight concrete we recommend a perlite, expanded shale, or
pumice aggregate. Tamped earth, adobe, nonchlorinated foams,
may also do instead of the concrete, if loads allow it.
966
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

T T
One version of gradual stiffening, 
using one inch flanks,
gypsum board and burlap as sheets, taith ultra-lightweight
concrete as fill.
The drawing above, shows one particular realisation of this
kind of gradual stiffening. But the principle is far more general
than this particular use of it. Indeed, it occurs, in one way or
another, in almost all traditional forms of building. Eskimo igloo
construction and African basket structures are both gradually
stiffened structures, where each next step copes with the existing
framework, adds to it, and stiffens it. The stone buildings of
Alberobello in southern Italy are examples. So is Elizabethan half-
timber construction.
967
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
Therefore:
Recognize that you are not assembling a building from
components like an erector set, but that you are instead
weaving a structure which starts out globally complete, but
flimsy; then gradually making it stiffer but still rather
flimsy; and only finally making it completely stiff and
strong.
We believe that in our own time, the most natural version
of this process is to put up a shell of sheet materials, and
then make it fully strong by filling it with a compressive
fill.
Choose the most natural materials you can, for the outer shell
itself—thin wood planks for columns, canvas or burlap for the
vaults, plaster board or plank or bricks or hollow tiles for walls—
GOOD MATERIALS (207).
Use ultra-lightweight 40 to 60 pounds perlite concrete for the
compressive fill—it has the same density as wood and can be cut
and nailed like wood, both during the construction and in later
years when repairs become necessary—GOOD MATERIALS (207).
Build up the columns first, then fill them with the ultra-
lightweight concrete; then build up the beams and fill them;
then the vaults, and cover them with a thin coat of concrete
which hardens to form a shell; then fill that shell with even
lighter weight materials to form the floors; then make the walls
and window frames, and fill them; and finally, the roof, again a
thin cloth vault covered with a coat of concrete to form a shell—
BOX COLUMNS (216), PERIMETER BEAM (217), WALL MEMBRANE
(2l8), FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219), ROOF VAULTS (22O). . . .
968
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

within this philosophy of structure^ on the basis of
the 'plans which you have made, work out the
complete structural layout; this is the last thing you
do on papert before you actually start to build;
209. 
ROOF LAYOUT
210. FLOOR AND CEILING LAYOUT
211. THICKENING THE OUTER WALLS
212. COLUMNS AT THE CORNERS
213. FINAL COLUMN DISTRIBUTION
969
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2O9 ROOF LAYOUT*
970
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

What kind of roof plan is organically related to the na-
ture of your building?
We know, from arguments presented in THE SHAPE OF INDOOR
SPACE (191), that the majority of spaces in an organic building
will have roughly—not necessarily perfectly—straight walls be-
cause it is only then that the space on both sides of the walls
can be positive, or convex in shape.
And we know, from similar arguments, that the majority of
the angles in the building will be roughly-—again, not exactly—
right angles, that is, in the general range of 80 to IOO degrees.
We know, therefore, that the class of natural plans may con-
tain a variety of shapes like half circles, octagons, and so on—but
that for the most part, it will be made of very rough, sloppy
rectangles.
We also know, from SHELTERING 
ROOF (117), that entire
wings should be under one roof whenever possible and that the
building is to be roofed with a mixture of flat roofs and sloping
or domical roofs, with the accent on those which are not flat.
We may therefore state the problem of defining a roof layout
as follows: Given an arbitrary flan of the type described above,
how can we jit to it an arrangement of roofs which conforms to
the CASCADE OF ROOFS (116) and SHELTERING ROOF (117) and
ROOF GARDENS(ll8}?
Before explaining the procedure for laying out roofs in detail,
we underline five assumptions which provide the basis for the
procedure.
971
. . . assume now that you have a rough plan, to scale, for each
floor of the building. In this case you already know roughly how
the roofs will go, from CASCADE OF ROOFS (116) and SHELTERING
ROOF (117); and you know exactly where the roof is flat to form
roof gardens next to rooms at different floors—ROOF GARDEN
(118). This pattern shows you how to get a detailed roof plan
for the building, which helps those patterns come to life, for any
plan which you have drawn.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
I. The "pitched" roofs may actually be pitched, or they may
be vaults with a curved pitch, or barrel vaults—as described in
ROOF VAULTS (izo). The general procedure, in all three cases,
is the same. (For curved vaults, define slope as height-to-width
ratio.)
The "fitch" of a vaulted roof.
2. Assume that all roofs in the building, which are not flat,
have roughly the same slope. For a given climate and roof con-
struction, one slope is usually best; and this greatly simplifies
construction.
The same slope throughout.
3. Since all roofs have the same slope, the roofs which cover
the widest wings and/or rooms will have the highest peaks;
those covering smaller wings and rooms will be relatively lower.
This is consistent with MAIN BUILDING (99), CASCADE OF ROOFS
(116), and CEILING HEIGHT VARIETY (190).
Wide roofs are highest.
4. Any place where the building helps to enclose an outdoor
room or courtyard needs an even eave line so that it has the
space of a "room." An irregular roof line, with gable ends, will
usually destroy the space of a small courtyard. It is necessary,
therefore, that roofs be hipped in these positions to make the
roof edge horizontal.
972
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2O9 
ROOF LAYOUT
5. In all other positions, leave the ends of buildings and wings
as gable ends.
973
One version of a roof layout^ using ultra-lightweight
concrete vaults as roofs.
Low roof edge round a cortyyard.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
We shall now discuss the rules for roofing a building by using
an example of a house designed by a layman using the pattern
language. This building plan is shown below. It is a single-story
house and it contains no roof gardens or balconies.
We first identify the largest rectangular cluster of rooms and
roof it with a peaked roof, the ridge line of which runs the
long direction:
Then we do the same with smaller clusters, until all the major
spaces are roofed.
Then we roof remaining small rooms, alcoves, and thick walls
with shed roofs sloping outward. These roofs should spring from
the base of the main roofs to help relieve them of outward
thrusts j their outside walls should be as low as possible.
974
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2O9 
ROOF LAYOUT
Finally, we identify the outdoor spaces (shown as A, B, and
C), and hip the roofs around them to preserve a more continuous
eave line around the spaces.
We shall now discuss a slightly more complicated example, a
two story building.
Next we move to the lower story, roofing the children's wing
under a flat roof to form a ROOF GARDEN (118) for the master
bedroom, and the larger living room under a pitched roof, again
with the ridge running lengthwise.
975
We begin with the top story, roofing the entire master bed-
room and bath under one peaked roof with the ridge running
lengthwise:
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
Then we bring the roof over the master bedroom down over
the interior loft.
Finally, we smooth the living room roof ridge line into the
side of the roof over the loft. This completes the roof layout.
It is very helpful, when you are laying out roofs, to remember
the structural principle outlined in CASCADE OF ROOFS (116).
When you have finished, the overall arrangement of the roofs
should form a self-buttressing cascade in which each lower roof
helps to take up the horizonal thrust generated by the higher
roofs—and the overall section of the roofs, taken in very very
general terms, tends toward a rough upside down catenary.
Therefore:
Arrange the roofs so that each distinct roof corresponds
to an identifiable social entity in the building or building
complex. Place the largest roofs—those which are highest
and have the largest span—over the largest and most im-
portant and most communal spaces; build the lesser roofs
off these largest and highest roofs; and build the smallest
roofs of all off these lesser roofs, in the form of half-vaults
and sheds over alcoves and thick walls.
976
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2O9 
ROOF LAYOUT
You can build all these roofs, and the connections between
them, by following the instructions for roof vaults—ROOF VAULTS
(220). When a wing ends in the open, leave the gable end at
full height; when a wing ends in a courtyard, hip the gable, so
that the horizontal roof edge makes the courtyard like a room—
COURTYARDS WHICH LIVE ( 11 5) .
Treat the smallest shed roofs, which cover thick walls and
alcoves, as buttresses, and build them to help take the horizontal
thrust from floor vaults and higher roof vaults—THICKENING THE
OUTER WALLS (2Il). . . .
977
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2IO FLOOR AND CEILING
LAYOUT
. . . EFFICIENT STRUCTURE (206) tells us that the spaces in the
building should be vaulted so that the floors and ceilings can be
made almost entirely of compression materials. To lay out the
floor and ceiling vaults, we must fit them to the variety of ceiling
heights over individual rooms—CEILING HEIGHT VARIETY (190)
and, on the top story, to the layout of the roof vaults—ROOF
LAYOUT (209).
Again, the basic problem is to maintain the integrity of
the social spaces in the plan.
We know, from STRUCTURE FOLLOWS SOCIAL SPACES (205),
that floor and ceiling vaults must correspond to the important
social spaces in the plan. But there are a great number of social
spaces, and they range in size from spaces like WINDOW PLACE
(180), perhaps five feet across, to spaces like FARMHOUSE KITCHEN
(139), perhaps 15 feet across, to collections of spaces, like COM-
MON AREAS AT THE HEART (129), perhaps 35 feet across.
Where vaults of different width are near each other, you
must remember to pay attention to the level of the floor above.
Either you can level out the floor by making the smaller vaults
have proportionately higher arches, or you can put extra ma-
terial in between to keep the small vaults low—see CEILING
HEIGHT VARIETY (190), or you can make steps in the floor above
to correspond to changes in the vault sizes below.
Vaults on different floors do not have to line up perfectly with
one another. In this sense they are far more flexible than
column-beam structures, and for this reason also better adapted
to STRUCTURE FOLLOWS SOCIAL SPACES (205). However, there
are limits. If one vault is placed so that its loads come down over
978
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2IO FLOOR AND CEILING LAYOUT
the arch of the vault below, this will put undue stress on the
lower vault. Instead, we make use of the fact that vertical forces,
passing through a continuous compressive medium, spread out
downward in a 45 degree angle cone. If the lower columns are
always within this cone, the upper vault will do no structural
damage to the vault below it.
To maintain reasonable structural integrity in the system of
vaults as a whole, we therefore suggest that every vault be placed
so that its loads come down in a position from which the forces
can go to the columns which support the next vault down, by
following a 45 degree diagonal.
With all this in mind then, work out a vault plan for your
building. We suggest that you try to keep the vaults aligned with
the rooms, with occasional adjustments to suit a very big room,
or a very small nook or alcove. The drawing on the next page
shows a floor and ceiling layout for a simple building.
Each space that you single out for a vault may have either a
two-way vault (a domical ceiling on a rectangular base) or a
one-way vault (a barrel vault). The two-way vaults are the most
efficient structurallyj but when a space is long and narrow, the
domical shape begins to act like a barrel vault. We therefore
979
The angle at which a vertical force spreads downward.
Good . . .
. . . no good
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
A version of floor-ceiling layout, shovin in flan and
section, for a simple ultra-Ughtvieight concrete building.
suggest domical vaults for spaces where the long side is not more
than twice the short side and barrel vaults for the spaces which
are narrower.
We also suggest that you use barrel vaults for the rooms imme-
diately under the roof. The roof itself is generally a barrel vault—
see ROOF VAULT (zzo)—so it is most natural to give the ceiling
of the space just under the roof a barrel vault as well.
The vaults described in FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219) may
980
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2IO FLOOR AND CEILING LAYOUT
span from 5 to 30 feet. And they require a rise of at least 13
per cent of the short span.
Therefore:
Draw a vault plan, for every floor. Use two-way vaults
most often; and one-way barrel vaults for any spaces which
are more than twice as long as they are wide. Draw sec-
tions through the building as you plan the vaults, and bear
the following facts in mind:
1. Generally speaking, the vaults should correspond to
rooms.
2. There will have to be a support under the sides of
each vault: this will usually be the top of a wall. Under
exceptional circumstances, it can be a beam or arch.
3. A vault may span as little as 5 feet and as much as 30
feet However, it must have a rise equal to at least 13 per
cent of its shorter span.
4. If the edge of one vault is more than a couple of feet
(in plan) from the edge of the vault below it—then the
lower vault will have to contain an arch to support the load
from the upper vault.
Put a PERIMETER BEAM (217) on all four sides of every vault,
along the top of the bearing wall, or spanning openings. Get the
shape of the vaults from FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219) and as
you lay out the sections through the vaults, bear in mind that the
perimeter beams get lower and lower on higher floors, because the
981
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
columns on upper stories must be shorter (top floor columns about
4 feet, one below top 6 feet, two below top 6 to 7 feet, three be-
low top 8 feet)—FINAL COLUMN DISTRIBUTION (213). Make sure
that variations in floor level coincide with the distinctions be-
tween quiet and more public areas—FLOOR SURFACE (233).
Complete the definition of the individual spaces which the vaults
create with COLUMNS AT THE CORNERS (212). Include the
smallest vaults of all, around the building edge, in THICKENING
THE OUTER WALLS (2Il). . . .
982
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

211 THICKENING THE
OUTER WALLS*
983
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . the arrangement of roof and floor vaults will generate hori-
zontal outward thrust, which needs to be buttressed—CASCADE OF
ROOFS (116). It also happens, that in a sensibly made building
every floor is surrounded, at various places, by small alcoves,
window seats, niches, and counters which form "thick walls"
around the outside edge of rooms—WINDOW PLACE (180),
THICK WALLS (197), SUNNY COUNTER (199), BUILT-IN SEATS
(202), CHILD CAVES (203), SECRET PLACE (204). The beauty
of a natural building is that these thick walls—since they need
lower ceilings, always, than the rooms they come from—can
work as buttresses.
Once the ROOF LAYOUT (209), and the FLOOR AND CEILING
LAYOUT (210) are clear these thick walls can be laid out in such
a way as to form the most effective butresses, against the horizontal
thrust developed by the vaults.
We have established in THICK WALLS (197), how impor-
tant it is for the walls of a building to have "depth" and
"volume," so that character accumulates in them, with time.
But when it comes to laying out a building and constructing
it, this turns out to be quite hard to do.
The walls will not usually be thick in the literal sense, except in
certain special cases where mud construction, for example, lends
itself to the making of walls. More often, the thickness of the wall
has to be built up from foam, plaster, columns, struts, and mem-
branes. In this case columns, above all, play the major role, be-
cause they do the most to encourage people to develop the walls.
For instance, if the framework of a wall is made of columns
standing away from the back face of the wall, then the wall
invites modification—-it becomes natural and easy to nail planks
to the columns, and so make seats, and shelves, and changes
there. But a pure, flat> blank wall does not give this kind of en-
couragement. Even though, theoretically, a person can always add
things which stick out from the wall, the very smoothness of the
984
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

211 
THICKENING THE OUTER WALLS
wall makes it much less likely to happen. Let us assume then, that
a thick wall becomes effective when it is a volume defined by
columns.
How is it possible for a wall of this kind to justify its expense
by helping the structure of the building? The fact that the
building is conceived as a compressive structure, whose floors
and roofs are vaults—EFFICIENT STRUCTURE (206), means that
there are horizontal thrusts developed on the outside of the build-
ing, where the vaults do not counterbalance one another.
To some extent this horizontal thrust can be avoided by ar-
ranging the overall shape of the building as an upside down
catenary—see CASCADE OF ROOFS (116). If it were a perfect cate-
nary, there would be ho outward thrust at all. Obviously, though,
most buildings are narrower and steeper than the ideal structural
catenary, so there are horizontal thrusts remaining. Although
these thrusts can be resolved by tensile reinforcing in the perimeter
beams—see PERIMETER BEAMS (217)—it is simplest, and most
natural, and stable to use the building itself to buttress the hori-
zontal thrusts.
This possibility occurs naturally wherever there are "thick
walls"—alcoves, window seats, or any other small spaces at the
outside edge of rooms, which can have lower ceilings than the
main room and can therefore have their roofs shaped as continua-
tions of the ceiling vault inside. This requires that thick walls be
outside the structure of the main room, so that their roofs and
walls come close to forming a catenary with the main vault.
985
Thick walls made effective by columns
Alcoves within the catenary.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
It is of course rare to be able to have the alcove or thick walls
approach a true catenary section—we hardly ever want them that
deep or that low. But even when the thick walls and alcoves are
inside the line of the catenary, they are still helping to counter
outward thrusts. And their buttressing effect can be improved
still more by making their roofs heavy. The extra weight will
tend to redirect the forces coming from the main vault
slightly more toward the ground.
The drawing below shows the way this pattern works, and
the kind of effect it has on a building.
The effect 
of thickening the outer walls,
shown in flan and section.
986
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

211 
THICKENING THE OUTER WALLS
Therefore:
Mark all those places in the plan where seats and closets
are to be. These places are given individually by ALCOVES
(179), WINDOW PLACES (l8o), THICK WALLS (197), SUNNY
COUNTER (199), WAIST-HIGH SHELF (20l), BUILT-IN SEATS
(202), and so on. Lay out a wide swath on the plan to cor-
respond to these positions. Make it two or three feet deep;
recognize that it will be outside the main space of the room;
your seats, niches, shelves, will feel attached to the main
space of rooms but not inside them. Then, when you lay
out columns and minor columns, place the columns in
such a way that they surround and define these thick vol-
umes of wall, as if they were rooms or alcoves.
For shelves and counters less than 2 feet deep, there is no
need to go to these lengths. The thickening can be built
simply by deepening columns and placing shelves between
them.
In order to make an alcove or thick wall work as a buttress,
build its roof as near as possible to a continuation of the curve of
the floor vault immediately inside. Load the roof of the buttress
with extra mass to help change the direction of the forces—ROOF
VAULTS (220). Recognize that these thick walls must be outside
987
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
the main space of the room, below the main vault of the room—
FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219), so that they help to buttress the
horizontal forces generated by the main vault of the ceiling.
When you lay out columns and minor colunms, put a column at
the corner of every thick wall, so that the wall space, like other
social spaces, becomes a recognizable part of the building struc-
ture 
COLUMNS AT THE CORNERS (212). . . .
988
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

9»9
212 COLUMNS AT THE
CORNERS**
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . assume that you have worked out the roof plan, and laid out
ceiling vaults for every room on every floor—ROOF LAYOUT
(209), FLOOR AND CEILING LAYOUT (2io). These vaults are not
only the basis of the structure, but also define the social spaces
underneath them. Now it is time to put columns at the corners
of the vaults. This will both complete them as clearly defined
social spaces—STRUCTURE FOLLOWS SOCIAL SPACES (205)—and
also be the first constructive step in the erection of the building
GRADUAL STIFFENING (2O8).
We have already established the idea that the struc-
tural components of a building should be congruent with
its social spaces.
In STRUCTURE FOLLOWS SOCIAL SPACES (205) we have estab-
lished that the columns need to be at corners of social spaces for
psychological reasons. In EFFICIENT STRUCTURE (206) we have
established that there needs to be a thickening of material at
the corners of a space for purely structural reasons.
Now we give yet a third still different derivation of the same
pattern—not based on psychological arguments or structural argu-
ments, but on the process by which a person can communicate a
complex design to the builder, and ensure that it can be built
in an organic manner.
We begin with the problem of measurement and working
drawings. For the last few decades it has been common practice
to specify a building plan by means of working drawings. These
measured drawings are then taken to the site; the builder
transfers the measurements to the site, and every detail of the
drawings is built in the flesh, on site.
This process cri-pfles buildings. It is not possible to make
such a drawing without a T-square. The necessities of the draw-
ing itself change the plan, make it more rigid, turn it into the
kind of plan which can be drawn and can be measured.
But the kind of plans which you can make by using the pattern
990
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

212 
COLUMNS AT THE CORNERS
language are much freer than that—and not so easy to draw and
measure. Whether you conceive these plans out on the site—and
mark them on the site with sticks and stones and chalk marks—
or draw them roughly on the back of envelopes or scraps of
tracing paper—in all events, the richness which you want to
build into the plan can only be preserved if the builder is able to
generate a living building, with all its slightly uneven lines and
imperfect angles.
In order to achieve this aim, the building must be generated
in an entirely different manner. It cannot be made by following
a working drawing slavishly. What must be done, essentially, is to
fix those points which generate the spaces—as jew of them as
possible—and then let these points generate the walls, right out
on the building site, during the very process of construction.
You may proceed like this: first fix the corner of every major
space by putting a stake in the ground. There are no more than
a few dozen of these corners in a building, so this is possible,
even if the measurements are intricate and irregular. Place these
corner markers where they seem right, without regard for the
991
Chalk marks on the ground.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
exact distances between them. There is no reason whatever to
try and make modular distances between them. If angles are
slightly off, as they often will be, the modular dimensions are
impossible anyway.
These simple marks are all you need to build the building.
Once construction starts, you can start very simply, by building
a column, over each of these marks. These columns will then
generate the rest of the building, by their mere presence, without
992
"Staking out"
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

993
212 
COLUMNS AT THE CORNERS
any further need for detailed measurements or drawings, because
the walls will simply be built along the lines which connect ad-
jacent columns: and everything else follows.
For the upper storys, you can make drawings of the column
positions and once again transfer them to the actual building
while it is being built. As you will see from FINAL COLUMN
DISTRIBUTION (213), upper story columns do not need to line
up perfectly with downstairs columns.
With this procedure, it becomes possible to transfer a rather
complex building from your mind, or from a scrap of paper, to
the site—and regenerate it in a way which makes it live out
there.
The method hinges on the fact that you can fix the corners
of the spaces first—and that these corners may then play a
significant role in the construction of the building. It is in-
teresting that although it is based on entirely different arguments
from STRUCTURE FOLLOWS SOCIAL SPACES (zo?), it leads to al-
most exactly the same conclusion.
Therefore:
On your rough building plan, draw a dot to represent
a column at the corner of every room and in the corners
formed by lesser spaces like thick walls and alcoves. Then
transfer these dots onto the ground out on the site with
stakes.
Once you have the columns for each floor on your vault plan,
reconcile them from floor to floor and put in intermediate col-
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
umns—FINAL COLUMN DISTRIBUTION (213). Note, especially,
that it is not necessary for the corner columns to fall on a grid.
The floor vaults and roof vaults can be made to fit any arrange-
ment of columns, and still make a coherent structure—thus allow-
ing the social spaces to determine the building shape without
undue constraint from purely structural considerations—FLOOR-
CEILING VAULTS (219), ROOF VAULTS (22O).
These columns will not only guide your mental image of the
building, they will also guide construction: first put the columns
and the column foundations in place; then, to make the frame
complete, tie the columns together around each room with the
perimeter 
beam—ROOT 
FOUNDATIONS (214), BOX COLUMNS
(216), PERIMETER BEAMS (zij). Give special emphasis to all
free-standing columns with the idea that when you build them,
you will make them very thick—COLUMN PLACE (226). . . .
994
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

995
213 FINAL COLUMN
DISTRIBUTION**
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

How should the spacing of the secondary columns which
stiffen the walls, vary with ceiling height, number of stories
and the size of rooms?
In some very gross intuitive way we know the answer to this
question. Roughly, if we imagine a building with the walls
stiffened at intervals along their length, we can see that the tex-
ture of these stiffeners needs to be largest near the ground,
where social spaces are largest and where loads are largest, and
smallest near the roof, where rooms are smallest and where loads
are least. In its gross intuitive form this is the same as the intui-
tion which tells us to expect the finest texture in the ribbing at
the fine end of a leaf where everything is smallest, and to expect
the grosser, cruder structure to be near the large part of the leaf.
. . . assume that you have placed the corner columns which
define the spaces—COLUMNS AT THE CORNERS (212). It is now
necessary to fill in the gaps between the columns with intermediate
stiffener columns as required by EFFICIENT STRUCTURE (206).
This pattern gives the spacing .of these intermediate stiffener
columns, and helps to generate the kind of walls which EFFI-
CIENT STRUCTURE (206) requires. It also helps to generate
CEILING HEIGHT VARIETY (iQO).
996
Leaf
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

213 
FINAL COLUMN DISTRIBUTION
These intuitions are borne out by many traditional building
forms where columns, or frames, or stiffeners are larger and
further apart near the ground, and finer and closer together
higher up. Our key picture shows examples. But what is the
structural basis for these intuitions?
Elastic plate theory gives us a formal explanation.
Consider an unstiffened thin wall carrying an axial load. This
wall will usually fail in buckling before it fails in pure compression
because it is thin. And this means that the material in the wall
is not being used efficiently. It is not able to carry the compressive
loads which its compressive strength makes possible because it is
too thin.
It is therefore natural to design a wall which is either thick
enough or stiffened enough so that it can carry loads up to its
full compressive capacity without buckling. Such a wall, which
uses its material to the limits of its compressive capacity, will then
also satisfy the demands of EFFICIENT STRUCTURE (206).
The critical factor is the slenderness of the wall: the ratio of
its height to its thickness. For the simple case of an unstiffened
concrete wall, the AC I code tells us that the wall will be able to
work at 93 per cent efficiency (that is, carry 93 per cent of its
potential compressive load without buckling), if it has a slender-
ness ratio of 10 or less. A wall 10 feet high and I foot thick is
therefore efficient in this sense.
Suppose now, that we extrapolate to the case of a stiffened wall
using elastic plate theory. By using the equation which relates
allowable stress to the spacing of stiffeners, we can obtain similar
figures for various walls with stiffeners. These figures are pre-
sented in the curve below. For example, a wall with a slender-
ness of 20 needs stiffeners at O.5H apart (where H is the
height) thus creating panels half as wide as they are high. In
general, obviously, the thinner the wall is, in relation to its
height, the more often it needs to be stiffened along its length.
In every case, the curve gives the spacing of stiffeners which
is needed to make the wall work at 93 per cent of its compressive
strength. In short, we may say that a wall built according to
the principle of EFFICIENT STRUCTURE (206) 
ought to be
stiffened in accordance with this curve.
The gradient of column spacing over different floors follows
997
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
The curve which relates wall slenderness
to the spacing of 
stiffeners.
directly from this curve. We may see this in the following
manner. The 
walls in a four story building carry loads which
are very roughly in the ratio 4:3:2:1 (only very roughly). In
any case, the loads the walls carry get less and less the higher we
go in the building. If all the walls are reaching their full com-
pressive capacity, this means that they must be getting steadily
thinner too, the higher one goes in the building. If we assume
that the walls all have the same height, then the four walls will
therefore have progressively greater and greater slenderness
ratios, and will therefore jail farther and further to the left on
the curve, and will therefore need to Be stiffened 
at closer and
closer intervals.
For example, suppose a four story building has 8 foot high
walls on all floors and has wall thicknesses of 12 inches, 9 inches,
6 inches, and 3 inches on its four floors. The slenderness ratios
are 8, II, 17, and 
33. In this case, reading off the curve, we
find the ground floor has no stiffeners at all (they are infinitely
far apart), the second floor has stiffeners at about 8 feet apart,
the third floor has them about 5 feet apart, and the top floor
has them about 2 feet apart.
In another case, where the walls are thinner (because materials
are lighter and loads smaller), the spacing will be closer. Suppose,
for example, that the necessary wall thicknesses are 8, 6, 4, and
998
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

213 
FINAL COLUMN DISTRIBUTION
2 inches. Then the slenderness ratios are 12, 16, 24., and 48,
and the stiffeners need to be spaced closer together than before:
nine feet apart on the ground story, 5 feet apart on the second
story, 3 feet apart on the third, and 15 inches apart on the top.
As you can see from these examples, the variation in column
spacing is surprisingly great; greater, in fact, than intuition would
allow. But the variation is so extreme because we have assumed
that ceiling heights are the same on every floor. In fact, in a
correctly designed building, the ceiling height will vary from
floor to floor; and under these circumstances, as we shall see, the
variation in column spacing becomes more reasonable. There are
two reasons why the ceiling height needs to vary from floor to
floor, one social and one structural.
In most buildings, the spaces and rooms on the first floor will
tend to be larger—since communal rooms, meeting rooms, and
so on, are generally better located near the entrance to buildings,
while private and smaller rooms will be on upper stories, deeper
into the building. Since the ceiling heights vary with the size of
social spaces—see CEILING HEIGHT VARIETY (190)—this means
that the ceiling heights are higher on the ground floor, getting
lower as one goes up. And the roof floor has either very short
walls or no wall at all—see SHELTERING ROOF (117).
999
And there is a second, purely structural explanation of the
fact that ceilings need to be lower on upper stories. It is embodied
in the drawing of the granary shown below. Suppose that a sys-
tem of columns is calculated for pure structure. The columns on
upper stories will be thinner, because they carry less load than
Variation of room sizes.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
those on lower stories. But because they are thinner, they have
less capacity to resist buckling, and must therefore be shorter if
we are to avoid wasting material. As a result, even in a granary,
where there are no social reasons for variation in ceiling height,
purely structural considerations create the necessity for thick col-
umns and high ceilings on the lower stories and for thinner and
thinner columns and lower and lower ceilings the higher one gets
in the building.
The same conclusion comes from consideration of our curve.
We have used the curve, so far, to tell us that stiffeners need
to be closer together on upper stories, because the walls are more
slender. We may also use the curve to tell us that, for a given
load, we should try to keep the slenderness ratio as low as possible.
On the upper stories, where walls are most apt to be thin, we
should therefore make the walls as low as possible, in order to
keep the slenderness ratios low.
1000
German granary.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

213 
FINAL COLUMN DISTRIBUTION
Let us assume now, that the wall heights do vary in a building,
in a manner consistent with these arguments. A four story
building, with an attic story on top, might then have these wall
heights (remember that the vault height, in a vaulted room, is
higher than the wall height): 9 feet on the ground floor, 7 feet
on the second, 6 feet on the third, and 4 feet on the fourth,
where the pitched roof comes down low over the eaves. And let
us assume that the wall thicknesses are 12 inches, 6 inches, 5
inches, and 3 inches, respectively. In this case, the slenderness
ratios will be 9, 14, 14, 15. The ground floor needs no stiffeners
at all; the second has them 6 feet apart; the third has them 5
feet apart; and the fourth has them 3 feet apart. We show a
similar distribution in the drawing opposite.
When you try to apply this pattern to floor plan, you will find
a certain type of difficulty. Since the corners of rooms may already
be fixed by COLUMNS AT THE CORNERS (212), it is not always
possible to space the stiffeners correctly within the wall of any
given room. Naturally this does not matter a great deal; the
stiffeners only need to be about right; the spacing can com-
fortably vary from room to room to fit the dimensions of the
walls. However, on the whole, you must try and put the stiffeners
closer together where the rooms are small and further apart where
rooms are large. If you do not, the building will seem odd, because
it defies one's structural intuitions.
Consider two rooms on the same floor, one twice as krge as the
other. The larger room has twice the perimeter, but its ceiling
generates four times the load; it therefore carries a greater load
per unit length of wall. In an ideal efficient structure, this means
that the wall must be thicker; and therefore, by the arguments
already given, it will need stiffeners spaced further apart than the
smaller room which carries less load and has thinner walls.
We recognize that few builders will take the trouble to make
wall thicknesses vary from room to room on one floor of the
building. However, even if the wall is uniformly thick, we be-
lieve that the stiffeners must at least not contradict this rule. If,
for reasons of layout, it is necessary that the spacing of stiffeners
varies from room to room, then it is essential that the larger
spacings of the stiffeners fall on those walls which enclose the
IOOI
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
The final column distribution in a four story building,
built according to our -patterns for columns,
walls and vaults.
larger rooms. If the greater spacing of stiffeners were to coincide
with smaller rooms, the eye would be so deceived that people
might misunderstand the building.
One important note. All of the preceding analysis is based on
the assumption that walls and stiffeners are behaving as elastic
plates. This is roughly true, and helps to explain the general
1002
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

213 
FINAL COLUMN DISTRIBUTION
phenomenon we are trying to describe. However, no wall behaves
perfectly as an elastic plate—least of all the kind of lightweight
concrete walls we are advocating in the rest of the construction
patterns. We have therefore used a modified form of the elastic
plate theory, calibrated according to the ACI code, so that the
numbers in our analysis are based on the elastic behavior of
concrete (and fall within the limits of its tension and compres-
sion). However, when the plate goes out of the elastic range and
cracks, as it almost certainly will in a concrete design, other
factors will enter in. We therefore caution the reader most
strongly not to take the actual numbers presented in our analysis
as more than illustrations. The numbers reflect the general mathe-
matical behavior of such a system, but they are not reliable
enough to use in structural computations.
Therefore:
Make column stiffeners furthest apart on the ground
floor and closer and closer together as you go higher in
the building. The exact column spacings for a particular
building will depend on heights and loads and wall thick-
nesses. The numbers in the following table are for illustra-
tion only, but they show roughly what is needed.
building height
in stories 
ground floor 2nd floor 3rd floor 4th floor
1003
Mark in these extra stiffening columns as dots between
the corner columns on the drawings you have made for
different floors. Adjust them so they are evenly spaced
between each pair of corner columns; but on any one floor,
make sure that they are closer together along the walls of
small rooms and further apart along the walls of large
rooms.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
To the extent consistent with CEILING HEIGHT VARIETY (190),
make walls and columns progressively shorter the higher you go
in the building to keep slenderness ratios low.
And make wall thicknesses and column thicknesses vary with
the height—see WALL MEMBRANE (218). Our calculations, for a
typical lightweight concrete building of the kind we have been
discussing, suggest the following orders of magnitude for wall
thicknesses: Top story—2 inches thick; one below top story—3
inches; two below top story—4 inches; three storys below top
(ground floor on a four story building)—5 inches. Of course
these numbers will change for different loads, or for different
materials, but they show the type of variation you can expect.
Coluihn thicknesses must be proportional to wall thicknesses,
so that the thinnest walls have the thinnest columns. If they are
very thin, it will be possible to make them simply by placing
boards, or one thickness of material, outside the outer skins which
form the wall membrane—see WALL MEMBRANE (218). If the
walls are thick, they will need to be full columns, twice as
thick as the walls, and roughly square in section, built before the
walls, but made in such a way that they can be poured integrally
with the walls—BOX COLUMNS (216). . . .
1004
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

'put stakes in the ground to mark the columns on the
site, and start erecting the main frame according to
the layout of these stakes;
214. ROOT FOUNDATIONS
215. GROUND FLOOR SLAB
216. BOX COLUMNS
217. PERIMETER BEAMS
218. WALL MEMBRANES
219. FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS
22O. ROOF VAULTS
IO05
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

214 ROOT FOUNDATIONS
The best foundations of all are the kinds of foundations
which a tree has—where the entire structure of the tree
simply continues below ground level, and creates a system
entirely integral with the ground, in tension and com-
pression.
When the column and the foundations are separate elements
which have to be connected, the connection becomes a difficult
and critical joint. Both bending and shear stresses are extremely
high just at the joint. If a connector is introduced as a third
element, there are even more joints to worry about, and each
member works less effectively to resist these stresses.
We suspect that it would be better to build the foundations
and the columns in such a way that the columns get rooted in
the foundation and become integral and continuous with the
ground.
In the realization of this pattern which we illustrate, the root
foundation takes a very simple form. Since columns start out
hollow, BOX COLUMNS (zi6), we can form a root foundation by
setting the hollow column into the foundation pit, and then
pouring the lower part of the column and the foundation, in-
tegrally, in a single pour.
As far as the wood version is concerned, the problem of placing
1006
. . . once you have a rough column plan for the building—
COLUMNS AT THE CORNERS (212), FINAL COLUMN DISTRIBUTION
(213)—you are ready to start the site work itself. First, stake out
the positions of the ground floor columns, before you do any
other earthwork, so that you can move the columns whenever
necessary to leave rocks or plants intact—SITE REPAIR (104),
CONNECTION TO THE EARTH (168). Then dig the foundation
pits and prepare to make the foundations.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

214 
ROOT FOUNDATIONS
One version of a root foundation for a hollow wooden box
column which we have built.
wood in contact with wet underground concrete is very serious.
The wood of the column can be protected from dry rot and ter-
mites by pressure dipping in pentachlorophenol. We also believe
that painting with thick asphalt or dampproof mastic might work;
but the problem isn't really solved. Of course, masonry versions
in which columns are made of terracotta pipe or concrete pipe
and filled with dense concrete, ought to work alright. But even
in these cases, we are doubtful about the exact structural validity
1007
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
of the pattern. We believe that some kind of structure which is
continuous with the ground is needed: but we quite haven't
been able to work it out. Meanwhile, we state this pattern as a
kind of challenge.
Namely:
Try to find a way of making foundations in which the
columns themselves go right into the earth, and spread
out there—so that the footing is continuous with the mate-
rial of the column, and the column, with its footing, like
a tree root, can resist tension and horizontal shear as well as
compression.
To make foundations like this for hollow concrete, filled box
columns, start with a pit for each foundation, place the hollow
column in the pit, and pour the column and the foundation
integrally, in one continuous pour—BOX COLUMNS (216). Later,
when you build the ground floor slab, tie the concrete into the
foundations—GROUND FLOOR SLAB (215).
1008
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

215 GROUND FLOOR SLAB
. . . this pattern helps to complete CONNECTION TO THE EARTH
(l68), EFFICIENT STRUCTURE (206), COLUMNS AT THE CORNERS
(212), and ROOT FOUNDATIONS (214). It is a simple slab, which
forms the ground floor of the building, ties the root foundations
to one another, and also allows you to form simple strip founda-
tions as part of the slab, to support the walls.
The slab is the easiest, cheapest, and most natural way
to lay a ground floor.
1009
A raised ground floor slab built inside a brick perimeter wall.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
When the ground is relatively level, a concrete slab which sits
directly on the ground is the most natural and cheapest way of
building a ground floor. Wood floors are expensive, need air
space underneath them, and need to be built up on continuous
foundation walls or beams. Prefabricated floor panels also need a
structure of some sort to support them. A slab floor, on the other
hand, uses the earth for support, and can supply the foundations
which are needed to support walls, by simple thickening.
The one trouble with slabs is that they can easily feel cold
and damp. We believe that this feeling is at least as much a
psychological one as a physical one (given a well-made and in-
sulated slab), and that the feeling is most pronounced with slabs
that are on grade. We therefore propose that the slab be raised
from the ground. This can be done by not excavating the ground
at all, instead only leveling it, and placing the usual bed of
rubble and gravel on top of the ground. (In normal practice,
the ground is excavated so that the top of the rubble is slightly
below grade, and the top of the slab only just above the ground.)
Therefore:
Build a ground floor slab, raised slightly—six or nine
inches above the ground—by first building a low perim-
eter wall around the building, tied into the column foun-
dations, and then filling it with rubble, gravel, and con-
crete.
Finish the public areas of the floor in brick, or tile, or
waxed and polished lightweight concrete, or even beaten earth;
as for those areas which will be more private, build them one
IOIO
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

215 
GROUND FLOOR SLAB
step up or one step down, with a lightweight concrete finish that
can be felted and carpeted—FLOOR SURFACE (233).
Build the low wall which forms the edge of the ground floor
slab out of brick, and tie it directly into all the terraces and paths
around the building—CONNECTION TO THE EARTH (168), SOFT
TILE AND BRICK (248). If you are building on a steep sloped
site, build part of the ground floor as a vaulted floor instead of
excavating to form a slab—FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219). . . .
ion
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2l6 BOX COLUMNS**
1012
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . if you use ROOT FOUNDATIONS (214), the columns must be
made at the same time as the foundations, since the foundation
and the column are integral. The height, spacing, and thickness
of the various columns in the building are given by FINAL
COLUMN DISTRIBUTION (213). This pattern describes the details
of construction for the individual columns.
In all the world's traditional and historic buildings, the
columns are expressive, beautiful, and treasured elements.
Only in modern buildings have they become ugly and
meaningless.
The fact is that no one any longer knows how to make a column
which is at the same time beautiful and structurally efficient. We
discuss the problem under seven separate headings:
1. Columns feel uncomfortable unless they are reasonably
thick and solid. This feeling is rooted in structural reality. A
long thin column, carrying a heavy load, is likely to fail by
buckling: and our feelings, apparently, are particularly tuned in
to this possibility.
We do not wish to exaggerate the need for thickness. Taken
too far, it could easily become a mannerism of a rather ridiculous
sort. But columns do need to be comfortable and solid, and only
thin when they are short enough to be in no danger of buckling.
When the column is a free-standing one, then the need for
thickness becomes essential. This is fully discussed under COLUMN
PLACE (226).
2. Structural arguments lead to exactly the same conclusion.
Thin, high strength materials, like steel tubes and prestressed
concrete, are ruled out by GOOD MATERIALS (207). Lower strength
materials which are ecologically sound have to be relatively fat
to cope with the loads.
3. The column must be cheap. An 8 by 8 solid wood column
is too expensive; thick brick or stone columns are almost out of
the question in today's market.
1013
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
4. It must be warm to the touch. Concrete columns and painted
steel columns have an unpleasant surface and are not very easy to
face.
5. If the column takes bending, the highest strength materials
should be concentrated toward the outside. Buckling and bending
strength both depend on the moment of inertia, which is highest
when the material is as far as possible from the neutral axis. A
stalk of grass is the archetypal example.
£***«,
A version of box columns made of i inch wood flanks,
nailed together with spiral groove nails, and filled with
chicken wire and ultra-lightweight concrete.
1014
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

216 
BOX COLUMNS
hust be easy to connect to foundations, beams,
and walls. Precast concrete columns are very hard to connect. So
are metal columns. Brick columns are easy to connect to brick
walls—not to the lighter weight skin structures required by WALL
MEMBRANE (218).
7. The column must be hand nailable, and hand cuttable to
make on-site modification and later repair as easy as possible.
Again, current materials do not easily meet this requirement.
A column which has all these features is a box column, where
the hollow tube can be made as thick as is required, and then
filled with a strong compressive material. Such a column can be
made cheaper than comparable wood and steel columns; the
outer skin can be made with a material that is beautiful, easy to
repair, and soft to the touch; the column can be stiffened for
bending, either by the skin itself, or by extra reinforcing; and,
for structural integrity, the fill material can be made continuous
with the column's footings and beams.
An example of a box column which we have built and tested
is a wooden box column, made with I inch wooden planks and
filled with lightweight concrete the same density as wood, so that
it has the overall volume and mass of a heavy 8 inch solid
column. The drawing opposite shows these wooden box columns
being made.
Box columns can be made in many other ways. One kind is
made by stacking 8 by 8 inch lightweight concrete blocks, and
filling the cavity with a concrete of the same density. Some wire
reinforcing inside the column is required to give the column
tensile strength. A hollow brick column, filled with earth is
1015
Possible box columns
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
another possibility. Concrete, vinyl, and terracotta sewer pipe
filled with lightweight concrete and reinforced with mesh; a
resin-impregnated cardboard tube filled with earth; or two con-
centric cardboard tubes with the cuter ring filled with concrete
and the inner ring filled with earth; still another is made from
a tube of chicken wire wesh, filled with rubble, plastered and
whitewashed on the outside. And still another can be made with
self-aligning hollow tiles for the skin. The tiles can be molded
by hand with a hand press—in concrete or tile; the soft tile will
make beautiful rose red, soft warm columns.
1016
Therefore:
Make the columns in the form of filled hollow tubes,
with a stiff tubular outer skin, and a solid core that is
strong in compression. Give the skin of the column some
tensile strength—preferably in the skin itself, but perhaps
with reinforcing wires in the fill.
Box columns made from concrete sewer pipe,
filled with concrete.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

216 
BOX COLUMNS
As you already know, it is best to build the columns integral
with ROOT FOUNDATIONS (214) on the ground floor, or integral
with the FLOOR-CEILING 
VAULTS (219) on upper floors, and
to fill them in one continuous pour. Once the columns are in
position, put in the PERIMETER BEAMS (217), and fill the beams
at the same time that you fill the upper part of the column.
If the column is free standing, put in column braces or column
capitals—COLUMN CONNECTION (227)—to brace the connection
between the two. And make the columns especially thick, or build
them in pairs, where they are free-standing, so that they form a
COLUMN PLACE (226). . . .
1017
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2iy PERIMETER BEAMS*
1018
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

If you conceive and build a room by first placing columns
at the corners, and then gradually weaving the walls and
ceiling round them, the room needs a perimeter beam
around its upper edge.
It is the beam, connecting the columns which creates a volume
you can visualize, before it is complete} and when the columns
are standing in the ground, you need the actual physical perimeter
beam, to generate this volume before your eyes, to let you see the
room as you are building it, and to tie the tops of the columns
together, physically. 
?
These reasons are conceptual. But of course, the conceptual
simplicity and Tightness of the beam around the room comes, in
the end, from the more basic fact that this beam has a number of
related structural functions, which make it an essential part of
any room built as a natural structure. The perimeter beam has
four structural functions:
1. It forms the natural thickening between the wall mem-
brane and vault membrane, described in EFFICIENT STRUCTURE
(206).
2. It resists the horizontal thrust of the ceiling vault, wherever
there are no outside external buttresses to do it, and no other
vaults to lean against.
3. It functions as a lintel, wherever doors and windows pierce
the wall membrane.
4. It transfers loads from columns in upper storys to the
columns and the wall membrane below it, and spreads these loads
out to distribute them evenly between the columns and the
membrane.
1019
. . . this pattern helps to complete BOX COLUMNS (216), by
tying the tops of the columns together once they are in position.
It also helps to form the bearing surface for the edge of the
FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219). For this reason, the positions of
the perimeter beams must correspond exactly to the edges of the
vaults laid out in FLOOR AND CEILING LAYOUT (210).
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
These functions of the perimeter beam show that the beam
must be as continuous as possible with walls and columns above,
the walls and columns below, and with the floor. If we follow
GOOD MATERIALS (207), the beam must also be easy to make, and
easy to cut to different lengths.
Available beams do not meet these requirements. Steel beams
and precast or prestressed beams cannot easily be tied into the
wall and floor to become continuous with these membranes. Far
more important, they cannot easily be cut on site to conform to
the exact dimensions of the different rooms which will occur in an
organic plan.
A version of the 'perimeter beam consistent with
the box column shown before.
IO2O
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

217 
PERIMETER 
BEAMS
Of course, wood beams meet both requirements: they are
easy to cut and can be tied along their lengths to wall and floor
membranes. However, as we have said in 
GOOD MATERIALS
(207), wood is unavailable in many places, and even where it is
available, it is becoming scarce and terribly expensive, especially
in the large sizes needed for beams.
To avoid the use of wood, we have designed a perimeter
beam—shown opposite—which is consistent with our box column,
and designed to be used together with it. It is a beam made by
first nailing up a channel made of wooden planks to the columns,
before the wall membranes are made; then putting in reinforcing,
and filling up with ultra-lightweight 60 pounds per cubic foot
concrete, after the walls are made and filled. This beam is excel-
lent for continuity. The wooden channel can first be made con-
tinuous with other skin elements by nailing, and the fill can
then be made continuous by filling columns and beams and walls
and vault in one continuous pour—see WALL MEMBRANES (218)
and FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219).
Of course, there are many other ways of making a perimeter
beam. First of all, there are several variants of our design: the
U-shaped channel can be made of fiberboard, plywood, precast
lightweight concrete, and, in every case, filled with lightweight
concrete. Then there are various traditional perimeter beams—
the Japanese version or the early American versions come to
mind. And then there are a variety of structures which are not
exactly even beams—but still act to spread vertical loads and
counteract horizontal thrusts. A row of brick arches might func-
tion in this way, in a far fetched case so might a tension ring of
jungle creeper.
Therefore:
Build a continuous perimeter beam around the room,
strong enough to resist the horizontal thrust of the vault
above, to spread the loads from upper stories onto columns,
to tie the columns together, and to function as a lintel over
openings in the wall. Make this beam continuous with
columns, walls and floor above, and columns and walls
below.
IO2I
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
Remember to place reinforcing in such a way that the perim-
eter beam acts in a horizontal direction as well as vertical.
When it forms the base for a FLOOR-CEILING VAULT (219) it
must be able to act as a ring beam to resist all those residual hori-
zontal outward thrusts not contained by the vault. Strengthen
the connection between the columns and the perimeter beam
with diagonal braces where the columns are free standing—
COLUMN CONNECTION (227). . . .
IO22
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2l8 WALL MEMBRANE*
In organic construction the walls must take their share
of the loads. They must work continuously with the struc-
ture on all four of their sides; and act to resist shear and
bending, and take loads in compression.
When walls are working like this, they are essentially structural
membranes: they are continuous in two dimensions; together with
stiffeners and columns they resist loads in compression; and they
create a continuous rigid connection between columns, beams, and
floors, both above and below, to help resist shear and bending.
By contrast, curtain walls and walls which are essentially "in-
fill," do not act as membranes. They may function as walls in
other respects—they insulate, enclose, they define space—but
they do not contribute to the overall structural solidity of the
building. They let the frame do all the work; structurally they
are wasted. [For the details of the argument that every part of
the structure must cooperate to take loads, see EFFICIENT STRUC-
TURE (206).]
A membrane, on the other hand, makes the wall an integral
thing, working with the structure around it. How should we build
such a wall membrane?
1023
. . . according to EFFICIENT STRUCTURE (206) and FINAL
COLUMN DISTRIBUTION (213), the wall is a compressive load-
bearing membrane, "stretched" between adj acent columns and
continuous with them, the columns themselves placed at frequent
intervals to act as stiffeners. The intervals vary from floor to floor,
according to column height; and the wall thickness (membrane
thickness) varies in a similar fashion. If the column stiffeners are
already in place according to BOX COLUMN (216), this pattern
describes the way to stretch the membrane from column to
column to form the walls.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
A version of an interior wall membrane which uses
gypsum board as skin, and ultra-lightweight concrete
for the fill.
GOOD MATERIALS (207) tells us that we should use hand
cuttable, nailable, ecologically sound materials, which one can
work with home tools, with the emphasis on earthen fill materials
and sheet materials.
GRADUAL STIFFENING (208) tells us that the process of build-
ing should be such that one can start with a flimsy structure and
stiffen it during the course of construction, as materials are put
in place, so that the process can be smooth and continuous.
1024
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

21 8 
WAT.L MEMBRANE
An example of such a wall that we have built and tested uses
gypboard for the inner skin, ship-lapped wooden boards for the
outer skin and ultra-lightweight concrete for the fill. The wall is
built by fixing nailing blocks to the sides of columns. We nail the
skin to the nailing blocks, put chickenwire into the cavity to rein-
force the concrete against shrinkage, and then pour the lightweight
concrete into the cavity. The wall needs to be braced during pour-
ing, and you can't pour more than two or three feet at a time: the
pressure gets too great. The last pour fills the perimeter beam
and the top of the wall, and so makes them integral. The drawing
opposite shows one way that we have made this particular kind
of wall membrane.
This wall is solid (about the density of wood), has good acoustic
and thermal properties, can easily be built to conform to free and
irregular plans, and can be nailed into. And because of its stif-
feners, the wall is very strong for its thickness.
Other versions of this pattern: (i) The skin can be formed
from hollow structural tiles or concrete blocks, with a concrete or
earthen fill. (2) The exterior skin might be brick, the interior
skin plywood or gypboard. In either case the columns would have
to be hollow tile, or concrete pipe, or other masonry box columns.
(3) The skin might be formed with wire mesh, gradually filled
with concrete and rubble, and stuccoed on the outside, with
plaster on the inside. The columns in this case can be built in the
same way—out of a wire mesh tube filled with rubble and con-
crete. (4) It may also be possible to use gypboard for both skins,
inside and out. The gypboard on the outer side could then be
covered with building paper, lath, and stucco.
Therefore:
Build the wall as a membrane which connects the
columns and door frames and windows frames and is, at
least in part, continuous with them. To build the wall, first
put up an inner and an outer membrane, which can func-
tion as a finished surface; then pour the fill into the wall.
1025
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
Remember that in a stiffened wall, the membranes can be
much thinner than you might expect, because the stiffeners pre-
vent buckling. In some cases they can be as thin as two inches in
a one story building, three inches at the bottom of a two-story
building and so on—see FINAL COLUMN DISTRIBUTION (213).
Membranes can be made from hollow tile, lightweight concrete
block, plywood, gypboard, wood planks, or any other sheet type
material which would make a nice surface, which is easy to nail
into, comfortable to touch, and so on. If the inner sheet is gypsum
board, it can be finished with a skim coat of plaster—SOFT INSIDE
WALLS (235). The outer sheet can be made of I inch boards,
tongue and grooved; or exterior grade plywood; or exterior
board hung with tile, shingles, or plastered—LAPPED OUTSIDE
WALLS (234). It is also possible to build the outer skin of brick
or tile: in this case, columns must be of the same material—SOFT
TILE AND BRICK (248). . . .
1O26
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

219 FLOOR-CEILING
VAULTS**
1027
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

We seek a ceiling vault shape which will support a live
load on the floor above, form the ceiling of the room be-
low, and generate as little bending and tension as possible
so that compressive materials can be relied on.
The vault shape is governed by two constraints: the ceiling can-
not be lower than about 6 feet at the edge of the room, except
in occasional attic rooms; and the ceiling in the middle of the
room should vary with the room size (8 to 12 feet for large
rooms, 7 to 9 feet for middle sized rooms, and 6 to 7 feet for the
very smallest alcoves and corners—see CEILING HEIGHT VARIETY
(190)).
We know, from structural considerations, that a circular shell
dome will generate virtually no bending moments when its rise
is at least 13 to 20 per cent of its diameter. (This is established in
studies and tests of shell structures, and is corroborated by our
own computer studies.) For a room 8 feet across, this requires a
rise of about 18 inches, making a total height of 7 to 8 feet in
the middle; for a room 15 feet across, it requires a rise of 2—3
feet, making a height of 8 to 10 feet in the middle.
Luckily, these vault heights are just congruent with the
needed ceiling heights. We may say, therefore, that the ideal
vault for an inhabited space is one which springs from 6 to 7 feet
at the edge, and rises 13 to 20 per cent of the smaller diameter.
1028
. . . we have already discussed the fact that ordinary joist floors
and slab floors are inefficient and wasteful because the tension
materials they use to resist bending are less common than pure
compression materials—EFFICIENT STRUCTURE (206), GOOD MA-
TERIALS (207), and that it is therefore desirable to use vaults
wherever possible. This pattern gives the shape and construction
of the vaults. The vaults will help to complete FLOOR AND CEILING
LAYOUT (210), and PERIMETER 
BEAMS (217); and, most im-
portant of all, they will help to create the CEILING HEIGHT
VARIETY (190) in different rooms.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

219 
FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS
There are various possible ways of making a circular or ellipti-
cal vault spring from a square or rectangular room.
i. One type of vault is made by arching diagonal ribs from
corner to corner; and then spacing straight line elements across
the ribs.
Each of these three vaults makes sense in slightly different
circumstances. The first is the easiest to conceive, but it has a
slight structural disadvantage: its surface panels are curved in one
direction only—because they are made of straight line elements
—and cannot therefore achieve the strength of a doubly curved
vault. The second is the hardest to conceive; however, it comes
naturally from the intersection of a spherical shape and a rectan-
gular one. If one were to make a vault by using a balloon as a form,
pushed up within the perimeter beams, the second type would
be the easiest to use. In the particular building technique we have
been using, the third type is easiest to use, because it is particularly
1029
2. Another type is a pure dome supported on squinches.
3. Another is based on a rectangular grid of arched ribs. The
edge ribs are entirely flat, and the center ribs have the greatest
curvature. In the end, each part of the vault is curved in three
dimensions, and the corners are slightly flattened.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
simple to lay out the arched ribs which provide the formwork. It
flattens out at the corners, which could create bending moments
and require tension materials. However, in lightweight con-
crete we have found that it does not require any more than the
shrinkage reinforcement, which is needed anyway.
We shall now describe a very simple way of making a vault.
Bear in mind that we considered it essential that the vault be
built up gradually, and that it could be fitted to any room shape,
without difficulty. This technique is not only cheap and simple. It
is also one of the only ways we have found of fitting a vault to
an arbitrary room shape. It works for rectangular rooms, rooms
that are just off-rectangles, and odd-shaped rooms. It can be
applied to rooms of any size. The height of the vault can be
varied according to its position in the overall array of ceiling
heights and floors—CEILING HEIGHT VARIETY (190), STRUCTURE
FOLLOWS 
SOCIAL 
SPACES 
(205), 
FLOOR 
AND 
CEILING 
LAYOUT
(210).
First, place lattice strips at one foot centers, spanning in one
direction, from one perimeter beam to the opposite perimeter
beam, bending each strip to make a sensible vault shape. Now
weave strips in the other direction, also at almost one foot centers,
to form a basket. The strips can be nailed onto the form of the
perimeter beam around the room. You will find that the basket is
immensely strong and stable.
Now stretch burlap over the lattice strips, tacking it on the
strips so it fits tightly. Paint the burlap with a heavy coat of
polyester resin to stiffen it.
1030
Lattice strips in position.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

219 
FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS
The burlap-resin skin is strong enough to support I to 2 inches
of lightweight concrete. In preparation for this, put a layer of
chickenwire, as shrinkage reinforcement, over the stiffened burlap.
Then trowel on a I- to 2-ineh layer of lightweight concrete. Once
again, use the ultra-lightweight 40-60 pound concrete described
in GOOD MATERIALS (207).
The shell which forms is strong enough to support the rest of
the vault, and the floor above.
1031
Burlap over the lattice work.
Resin over burlap.
Lightweight concrete on.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
The rest of the vault should not be poured until all edges are
in, columns for the next floor are in position, and ducts are in—
see BOX COLUMNS (216), DUCT SPACE (229). In order to keep
the weight of the vault down, it is important that even the ultra-
lightweight concrete be further lightened, by mixing it with 50
per cent voids and ducts. Any kind of voids can be used—empty
One version of a floor-ceiling vault, made of thin wooden
lattice strip woven like a basket, burlap, resin, chicken-
vjire and ultra lightweight concrete.
1032
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

219 
FLOOR-CEILING 
VAULTS
beer cans, wine jugs, sono tubes, ducts, chunks of polyurethane.
Or voids can be made very much like the vaults themselves by
making arches with latticing between columns and then stretching
burlap from these arches to the dome. The drawing opposite
shows the sequence of construction.
A 16 by 20 foot vault similar to the one shown in our photo-
graphs has been analyzed by a computerized finite element
analysis. The concrete was assumed to be 40 pounds perlite, with a
1033
Results of computer analysis.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
test compressive strength of 600 psi. Tensile strength is taken as
34 psi, and bending as 25.5 inch pounds per inch. These figures
are based on the assumption that the concrete is unreinforced.
Dead loads were figured at 60 pounds per square foot assuming
50 per cent voids in the spandrels of the vault. Live loads were
taken to be 50 pounds per square foot.
According to the analysis, under such loading the largest
compressive stress in this dome occurs near the base at mid points
of all four sides and is 120 psi. Outward thrust is the greatest at
quarter points along all four walls, and is 1769 pounds. The
maximum tension of 32 psi occurs at the corners. Maximum
bending is 10 inch pounds per inch. All of these are well within
the capacity of the vault, and besides, shrinkage reinforcement
in the vault will make it even stronger.
The analysis shows, then, that even though the vault is an
impure form (it contains square panels which are actually sagging
within the overall configuration of the vault shape), its structural
behavior is still close enough to that of a pure vault to work
essentially as a compression structure. There are small amounts of
local bending; and the corner positions of the dome suffer small
amounts of tension, but the chickenwire needed for shrinkage will
take care of both these stresses.
Here are some other possible ways of building such a vault:
To begin with, instead of wood for the lattice work, many
other materials can be used: plastic strips, thin metal tubes,
bamboos. Other resins besides polyester resins can be used to
stiffen the burlap. If resins are unavailable, then the form for
the vault can be made by placing lattice strips as described, and
then stretching chickenwire over it, then burlap soaked in mortar
which is allowed to harden before concrete is placed. It might
also be possible to use matting stiffened with glue, perhaps even
papier mache.
It is possible that similar vaults could be formed by altogether
different means: perhaps with pneumatic membranes or balloons.
And it is of course possible to form vaults by using very traditional
methods: bricks or stones, on centering, like the beautiful vaults
used in renaissance churches, gothic cathedrals, and so on.
1034
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

219 
FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS
Therefore:
Build floors and ceilings in the form of elliptical vaults
which rise between 13 and 20 per cent of the shorter span.
Use a type of construction which makes it possible to fit the
vault to any shaped room after the walls and columns are
in position: on no account use a prefabricated vault.
When the main vault is finished, mark the positions of all
those columns which will be placed on the floor above it—FINAL
COLUMN 
DISTRIBUTION 
(213). Whenever there are columns
which are more than 2 feet away from the perimeter beam,
strengthen the vault with ribs and extra reinforcing to withstand
the vertical forces.
Put all the upper columns in position before you pour the floor
of the vault, so that when you pour it, the concrete will pour
around the column feet, and anchor them firmly in the same way
that they are anchored in the foundations—ROOT FOUNDATIONS
(2I4)'
To finish the under surface of the vault paint it or plaster it—
SOFT INSIDE WALLS (235). As for the floor surface above, either
wax it and polish it or cover it with soft materials—FLOOR SUR-
FACE (233). . . .
1035
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

22O ROOF VAULTS*
1036
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . if the roof is a flat ROOF GARDEN (118), it can be built
just like any FLOOR-CEILING VAULT (219). But when it is a
sloping roof, according to the character of SHELTERING ROOF
(117), it needs a new construction, specifically adapted to the
shape which can enclose a volume.
What is the best shape for a roof?
For some reason, this is the most loaded, the most emotional
question, that can be asked about building construction. In all our
investigations of patterns, we have not found any other pattern
which generates so much discussion, so much disagreement, and
so much emotion. Early childhood images play a vital role; so
does cultural prejudice. It is hard to imagine an Arab building
with a pitched roof; hard to imagine a New England farmhouse
with a Russian onion roof over a tower; hard to imagine a
person who has grown up among pitched steep wooden roofs,
happy under the stone cones of the trulli.
1037
All over the world.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
For this reason, in this pattern we make our discussion as
fundamental as we can. We shall do everything we can to obtain
the necessary features which we can treat as invariant for all roofs,
regardless of people or culture—yet deep enough to allow a rich
assortment of cultural variations.
We approach the problem with the assumption that there are
no constraints created by techniques or availability of materials.
We are merely concerned with the optimum shape and distribu-
tion of materials. Given a roughly rectangular plan, or plan
composed of rectangular pieces connected, what is the best shape
for the shell of the roof which covers them ?
The requirements influencing the shape are these:
1. The feeling of shelter—SHELTERING ROOF (117). This re-
quires that the roof cover a whole wing (that is, not merely room
by room). It requires that some of the roof be highly visible—
hence, that it have a fairly steep slope—and that some of the
roof be flat and usable for gardens or terraces.
2. The roof must definitely contain lived-in space—that is,
not just sit on top of the rooms which are all below—see SHELTER-
ING ROOF (117). This means it needs rather a steep slope at the
edge—because otherwise there is no headroom. This requires an
elliptical section dome, or a barrel vault (which starts going up
vertically at the edge), or a very steep slope.
3. In plan, each individual roof is a very rough rectangle, with
occasional variations. This follows from the way the roofs of a
building must, together, follow the social layout of the plan—
ROOF LAYOUT (209).
4. The roof shape must be relaxed—that is, it can be used in
any plan layout—and can be generated very simply from a few
generating lines which follow automatically from the plan—that
is, it must not be a tricky or contrived shape which needs a lot
of fiddling around to define it—STRUCTURE FOLLOWS SOCIAL
SPACES(205).
5. Structural considerations require a curved shell, dome or
vault to eliminate as much bending as possible—see EFFICIENT
STRUCTURE (206) and GOOD MATERIALS (207). Of COUrse, to
the extent that wood or steel or other tension materials are avail-
able, this requirement can be relaxed.
6. The roof is steep enough to shed rain and snow in climates
1038
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

where they occur. Obviously, this aspect of the roof will vary
from climate to climate.
These requirements eliminate the following kinds of roofs:
1. Flat roofs. Flat roofs, except ROOF GARDENS (118), are
already eliminated by the psychological arguments of SHELTERING
ROOFS (117) and, of course, by structural considerations. A flat
roof is necessary where people are going to walk on it; but it is a
very inefficient structural shape since it creates bending.
2. Pitched Roofs. Pitched roofs still require materials that can
withstand bending moment. The most common material for
pitched roofs—wood—is becoming scarce and expensive. As we
have said in GOOD MATERIALS (207), we believe it is most sensible
to keep wood for surfaces and not to use it as a structural material,
except in wood rich areas. Pitched roofs also need to be very
steep, indeed, to enclose habitable space as required by SHELTER-
ING ROOF (117)—and hence rather inefficient.
3. Dutch barn and mansard roofs. These roofs enclose habit-
able space more efficiently than pitched roofs; but they have the
same structural drawbacks.
4. Geodesic domes. These domes cover essentially circular
areas, and are not therefore useful in their ordinary form^—
CASCADE OF ROOFS (ll6), STRUCTURE FOLLOWS SOCIAL SPACES
(205). In the modified form, which comes when you stretch
1039
22O 
ROOF VAULTS
. . . relaxed
. . . relaxed
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
the base into a rough rectangle, they become more or less congru-
ent with the class of vaults defined by this pattern.
5. Cable nets and tents. These roofs use tensile materials in-
stead of compressive ones—they do not conform to the require-
ments of GOOD MATERIALS (207). They are also very inefficient
when it comes to enclosing habitable space—and thus fail to meet
the requirements of STRUCTURE FOLLOWS SOCIAL SPACES (205).
The roofs which satisfy the requirements are all types of rec-
tangular barrel vaults or shells, with or without a peak, gabled or
hipped, and with a variety of possible cross sections. Almost any
one of these shells will be further strengthened by additional un-
dulations in the direction of the vault. Examples of possible cross
sections are given below. (Remember that this does not include
those flat ROOF GARDENS (118) built over FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS
(219).)
We have developed a range of roof vaults which are rather
similar to a pitched roof—but with a convex curve great enough
to eliminate bending, in some cases actually approaching barrel
vaults. One is shown in the drawing opposite; another is shown
below.
Another version of a roof vault, built by Bob Harris in Oregon.
1040
Possible roof vaults.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

22O 
ROOF VAULTS
We build the roof vault very much like the floor vaults:
1. First span the wing to be roofed with pairs of lattice strips
which are securely nailed at their ends to the perimeter beam,
and weighted at their apex so that the two pieces become slightly
curved.
2. Make the frame for the ceiling under the roof frame at the
same time according to FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219).
3. Repeat this frame every 18 inches, until the entire wing is
A type of roof vault, similar to the floor-ceiling vault,
made from lattice strips, burlap, chicken-wire and ultra-
lightweight concrete, but with an apex, and a pitch, and
undulations for strength.
1041
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
framed. The outer one will be the same, while the inner frame
for the ceiling may change according to the rooms under it.
4. Now lay burlap over the ceiling frame, then resin, then 1^2
inches of ultra-lightweight concrete—as for FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS
(219).
5. Now lay burlap over the roof frame, tacking it onto the
lattice strips so that there is a 3-inch scallop in between the ribs—
to form structural undulations in the skin. Again, paint the
burlap with resin; lay chickenwire and put a layer of lightweight
concrete over the entire roof.
We have analyzed a 48-foot roof of this type by means of a
computerized finite element analysis similar to the one described
for FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219). The analysis shows that the
maximum membrane compressive stress in the roof is 39.6 psi; the
maximum membrane tensile stress is 2.5 psi, and the maximum di-
agonal membrane stress which develops from the maximum shear
of 41.7 psi is 15.2 psi. These stresses are within the capacity of the
material (See allowable stresses given in FLOOR-CEILING VAULT
(219)). The maximum membrane bending moment is 46 inch
pounds per inch which is higher than the capacity of the unrein-
forced section, but extrapolations from our data show that this
will be comfortably taken care of by the reinforcing which is
needed anyway for shrinkage. Roofs with smaller spans, for a
typical WING OF LIGHT (106), will be even stronger.
Of course there are dozens of other ways to make a roof vault.
Other versions include ordinary barrel vaults, lamella structures
in the form of barrel vaults, elongated geodesic domes (built up
from struts), vaults built up from plastic sheets, or fiberglass, or
corrugated metal.
But, in one way or another, build your roofs according to the
invariant defined below, remembering that it lies somewhere in
between the Crystal Palace, the stone vaults of Alberobello, mud
huts of the Congo, grass structures of the South Pacific, and the
corrugated iron huts of our own time. This shape is required
whenever you are working with materials which are in pure
compression.
Obviously, if you have access to wood or steel and want to use
it, you can modify this shape by adding tension members. How-
ever, we believe that these tension materials will become more
1042
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

22O 
ROOF VAULTS
and more rare as time goes on and that the pure compression
shape will gradually become a universal.
Therefore:
Build the roof vault either as a cylindrical barrel vault, or
like a pitched roof with a slight convex curve in each of
the two sloping sides. Put in undulations along the vault,
to make the shell more effective. The curvature of the main
shell, and of the undulations, can vary with the span;
the bigger the span, the deeper the curvature and undula-
tions need to be.
1043
Experimental roof vaults.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
Leave space for dormers at intervals along the vault—DORMER
WINDOWS (231), and build them integral with it. Finish the roof
with ROOF CAPS (232). And once the vault is complete, it needs
a waterproof paint or skin applied to its outer surface—LAPPED
OUTSIDE WALLS (234). It can be painted white to protect it
against the sun; the undulations will carry the rainwater. . . .
1044
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

within the main jrame of the buildingy fix the exact
positions for openings—the doors and the windows
—and frame these openings.
221. NATURAL DOORS AND WINDOWS
222. LOW SILL
223. DEEP REVEALS
224. LOW DOOR WAY
225. FRAMES AS THICKENED EDGES
1045
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

221 NATURAL DOORS
AND WINDOWS**
1046
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

Finding the right position for a window or a door is a
subtle matter. But there are very few ways of building
which take this into consideration.
In our current ways of building, the delicacy of placing a
window or a door has nearly vanished. But it is just this refine-
ment, down to the last foot, even to the last inch or two, which
makes an immense difference. Windows and doors which are
just right are always like this. Find a beautiful window. Study it.
See how different it would be if its dimensions varied a few
inches in either direction.
Now look at the windows and doors in most buildings made
during the last 20 years. Assume that these openings are in
roughly the right place, but notice how they could be improved
if they were free to shift around, a few inches here and there,
each one taking advantage of its own special circumstances—the
space immediately inside and the view outside.
It is almost always a rigid construction system, combined with
a formal aesthetic, which holds these windows in such a, death
grip. There is nothing else to this regularity, for it is possible
to relax the regularity without losing structural integrity.
It is also important to realize that this final placing of windows
and doors can only be done on site, with the rough frame of the
building in position. It is impossible to do it on paper. But on
the site it is quite straightforward and natural: mock up the
openings with scraps of lumber or string and move them around
until they feel right; pay careful attention to the organization of
the view and the kind of space that is created inside.
1047
. . . imagine that you are now standing in the built-up frame of
a partly constructed building, with the columns and beams in
place 
BOX COLUMNS (2l6), PERIMETER BEAMS (217). YOU
know roughly where you want doors and windows from ZEN
VIEW (l34), STREET WINDOWS (164), WINDOW PLACE (l8o),
WINDOWS OVERLOOKING LIFE (192), CORNER DOORS (196). Now
you can settle on the exact positions of the frames.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
As we shall see in a later pattern—SMALL PANES (239), it is
not necessary to make the windows any special dimensions, or to
try and make them multiples of any standard pane size. Whatever
dimensions this pattern gives each window, it will then be possi-
ble to divide it up, to form small panes, which will be different in
their exact shape and size, according to the window they are in.
However, although there is no constraint on the exact dimen-
sion of the windows, there is a general rule of thumb, which will
make window sizes vary: Windows, as a rule, should become
smaller as you get higher up in the building.
1. The area of windows needed for light and ventilation de-
pends on the size of rooms, and rooms are generally smaller on
upper stories of the building—the communal rooms are generally
on the ground floor and more private rooms upstairs.
2. The amount of daylight coming through a window depends
on the area of open sky visible through the window. The higher
the window, the more open sky is visible (because nearby trees
and buildings obscure less)—so less window area is needed to get
sufficient daylight in.
3. To feel safe on the upper stories of a building, one wants
more enclosure, smaller windows, higher sills—and the higher off
the ground one is, the more one needs these psychological protec-
tions.
Therefore:
On no account use standard doors or windows. Make
each window a different size, according to its place.
Do not fix the exact position or size of the door and win-
1048
Getting it just right.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

221 NATURAL DOORS AND WINDOWS
dow frames until the rough framing of the room has ac-
tually been built, and you can really stand inside the room
and judge, by eye, exactly where you want to put them, and
how big you want them. When you decide, mark the
openings with strings.
Make the windows smaller and smaller, as you go
higher hi the building.
Fine tune the exact position of each edge, and mullion, and
sill, according to your comfort in the room, and the view that the
window looks onto—LOW SILL (222), DEEP REVEALS (223). As
a result, each window will have a different size and shape, accord-
ing to its position in the building. This means that it is obviously
impossible to use standard windows and even impossible to make
each window a simple multiple of standard panes. But it will
still be possible to glaze each window, since the procedure for
building the panes makes them divisions of the whole, instead of
making up the whole as a multiple of standard panes—SMALL
PANES (239). . . .
1049
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

222 
LOW SILL
1050
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . this pattern helps to complete NATURAL DOORS AND WINDOWS
(221), and the special love for the view, and for the earth out-
side, which ZEN VIEW (134), WINDOW PLACE (180) and WIN-
DOWS OVERLOOKING LIFE (192) all need.
One of a window's most important functions is to put
you in touch with the outdoors. If the sill is too high, it
cuts you off.
The "right" height for a ground floor window sill is astonish-
ingly low. Our experiments show that sills which are 13 or 14
inches from the floor are perfect. This is much lower than the
window sills which people most often build: a standard window
sill is about 24 to 36 inches from the ground. And it is higher
than French doors and windows which usually have a bottom rail
of 8 to I o inches. The best height, then, happens to be a rather
uncommon one.
We first give the detailed explanation for this phenomenon,
and we then explain the modifications which are necessary on
upper floors.
People are drawn to windows because of the light and the
view outside—they are natural places to sit by when reading,
talking, sewing, and so on, yet most windows have sill heights of
30 inches or so, so that when you sit down by them you cannot
see the ground right near the window. This is unusually frus-
trating—you almost have to stand up to get a complete view.
In "The Function of Windows: A Reappraisal" 
(Building
Science, Vol. 2, Pergamon Press, 1967, pp. 97-121), Thomas
Markus shows that the primary function of windows is not to
provide light but to provide a link to the outside and, further-
more, that this link is most meaningful when it contains a view of
the ground and the horizon. Windows with high sills cut out the
view of the ground.
On the other hand, glass all the way down to the floor is
undesirable. It is disturbing because it seems contradictory and
1051
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
even dangerous. It feels more like a door than a window; you
have the feeling that you ought to be able to walk through it. If
the sill is 12 to 14 inches high, you can comfortably see the
ground, even if you are a foot or two away from the window,
and it still feels like a window rather than a door.
On upper stories the sill height needs to be slightly higher.
The sill still needs to be low to see the ground, but it is unsafe
if it is too low. A sill height of about 20 inches allows you to see
most of the ground, from a chair nearby, and still feel safe.
Therefore:
When determining exact location of windows also decide
which windows should have low sills. On the first floor,
make the sills of windows which you plan to sit by between
12 and 14 inches high. On the upper stories, make them
higher, around 20 inches.
Make the sill part of the frame, and make it wide enough to
put things on—WAIST-HIGH SHELF (201), FRAMES AS THICKENED
EDGES (225), WINDOWS WHICH OPEN WIDE (236). Make the
window open outward, so that you can use the sill as a shelf, and
so that you can lean out and tend the flowers. If you can, put
flowers right outside the window, on the ground or raised a
little, too, so that you can always see the flowers from inside the
room 
RAISED FLOWERS (245). . . .
1052
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

223 DEEP REVEALS
1053
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

Windows with a sharp edge where the frame meets the
wall create harsh, blinding glare, and make the rooms they
serve uncomfortable.
They have the same effect as the bright headlights of an on-
coming car: the glare prevents you from seeing anything else on
the road because your eye cannot simultaneously adapt to the
bright headlights and to the darkness of the roadway. Just so, a
window is always much brighter than an interior wall; and the
walls tend to be darkest next to the window's edge. The dif-
ference in brightness between the bright window and the dark
wall around it also causes glare.
To solve this problem, the edge of the window must be
splayed, by making a reveal between the window and the wall.
The splayed reveal then creates a transition area—a zone of
intermediate brightness—between the brightness of the window
and the darkness of the wall. If the reveal is deep enough and
the angle just right, the glare will vanish altogether.
But the reveal must be quite deep, and the angle of the splay
quite marked. In empirical studies of glare, Hopkinson and
1054
. . . this pattern helps to complete the work of LIGHT ON TWO
SIDES OF EVERY ROOM (159), by going even further to reduce
glare; and it helps to shape the FRAMES AS THICKENED EDGES
(225).
Glare . . . and no glare.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

Petherbridge have found: (i) that the larger the reveal is, the
less glare there is; (2) the reveal functions best, when its bright-
ness is just halfway between the brightness of the window and
the brightness of the wall. ("Discomfort Glare and the Lighting
of Buildings," Transactions of the Illuminating 
Engineering
Society, Vol. XV, No. 2, 1950, pp. 58-59.)
Our own experiments show that this happens most nearly, when
the reveal lies at between 50 and 60 degrees to the plane of the
window; though, of course, the angle will vary with local condi-
tions. And, to satisfy the need for a "large" reveal, we have found
that the reveal itself must be a good 10 to 12 inches wide.
Therefore:
Make the window frame a deep, splayed edge: about a
foot wide and splayed at about 50 to 60 degrees to the plane
of the window, so that the gentle gradient of daylight gives
a smooth transition between the light of the window and
the dark of the inner wall.
Build the depth of the frame so that it is continuous with the
structure of the walls—FRAMES AS THICKENED EDGES (225);
if the wall is thin, make up the necessary depth for the reveal
on the inside face of the wall, with bookshelves, closets or other
THICK WALLS (197); embellish the edge of the window even
further, to make light even softer, with lace work, tracery, and
climbing plants—FILTERED LIGHT (238), HALF-INCH TRIM
(240), CLIMBING PLANTS (246). . . .
1055
223   DEEP REVEALS
50 to 60 degrees
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

224 LOW DOORWAY
1056
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

High doorways are simple and convenient. But a lower
door is often more profound.
The 6' 8" rectangular door is such a standard pattern, and is
so taken for granted, that it is hard to imagine how strongly it
dominates the experience of transition. There have been times,
however, when people were more sensitive to the moment of
passage, and made the shape of their doors convey the feeling of
transition.
An extreme case is the Japanese tea house, where a person
entering must literally kneel down and crawl in through a low
hole in the wall. Once inside, shoes off, the guest is entirely a
guest, in the world of his host.
Among architects, Frank Lloyd Wright used the pattern many
times. There is a beautifully low trellised walk behind. Taliesin
West, marking the transition out of the main house, along the
path to the studios.
If you are going to try this pattern, test it first by pinning
cardboard up to effectively lower the frame. Make the doorway
low enough so that it appears "lower than usual"—then people
will immediately adapt to it, and tall people will not hit their
heads.
Therefore:
Instead of taking it for granted that your doors are
simply 6' 8" rectangular openings to pass through, make
at least some of your doorways low enough so that the act
of going through the door is a deliberate thoughtful passage
1057
. . . some of the doors in a building play a special role in
creating transitions and maintaining privacy: it may be any of
the doors governed by FAMILY OF ENTRANCES (102), or MAIN
ENTRANCE (lio), Or THE FLOW THROUGH ROOMS (131) Or
CORNER DOORS (196), Or NATURAL DOORS AND WINDOWS (22l).
This pattern helps to complete these doors by giving them a
special height and shape.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
from one place to another. Especially at the entrance to
a house, at the entrance to a private room, or a fire corner—
make the doorway lower than usual, perhaps even as low as
5'8".
Test the height before you build it, in place—NATURAL DOORS
AND WINDOWS (221). Build the door frame as part of the struc-
ture—FRAMES AS THICKENED EDGES (225), and make it beau-
tiful with ORNAMENT (249) around the frame. If there is a door,
glaze it, at least partially—SOLID DOORS WITH GLASS (237). . . .
1058
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

225 
FRAMES.AS THICKENED
EDGES**
1059
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

Any homogeneous membrane which has holes in it will
tend to rupture at the holes, unless the edges of the holes
are reinforced by thickening.
The most familiar example of this principle at work is in the
human face itself. Both eyes and mouth are surrounded by extra
bone and flesh. It is this thickening, around the eyes and mouth,
which gives them their character and helps to make them
such important parts of human physiognomy.
A building also has its eyes and mouth: the windows and the
doors. And following the principle which we observe in nature,
almost every building has its windows and doors elaborated, made
more special, by just the kind of thickening we see in eyes and
mouths.
The fact that openings in naturally occurring membranes are
invariably thickened can be easily explained by considering how
the lines of force in the membrane must flow around the hole.
The density of the lines re-present increasing
stress concentrations.
1060
. . . assume that columns and beams are in and that you have
marked the exact positions of the doors and windows with string
or pencil marks—NATURAL DOORS AND WINDOWS (221). You are
ready to build the frames. Remember that a well made frame
needs to be continuous with the surrounding wall, so that it
helps the building structurally—EFFICIENT STRUCTURE (206),
GRADUAL STIFFENING (208).
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

225 FRAMES AS THICKENED EDGES
The increasing density of lines of force around the perimeter of
the hole requires that additional material be generated there to
prevent tearing.
Consider a soap film. When you prick the film, the tension
pulls the film apart, and it disintegrates. But if you insert a ring
of string into the film, the hole will hold, because the tensile
forces which accumulate around the opening can be held by the
thicker ring. This is in tension. The same is true for buckling
and compression. When a thin plate is functioning in compression
and a hole is made in it, the hole needs stiffening. It is impor-
tant to recognize that this stiffening is not only supporting the
opening itself against collapse, but it is taking care of the stresses
in the membrane which would normally be distributed in that
part of the membrane which is removed. Familiar examples of
such stiffening in plates are the lips of steel around the portholes
in a ship or in a locomotive cab.
The same is true for doors and windows in a building. Where
the walls are made of wood planks and lightweight concrete
fill—see WALL MEMBRANES (218)—the thickened frames can
be made from the same wood planks, placed to form a bulge, and
then filled to be continuous with the wall. If other types of skin
are used in the wall membranes, there will be other kinds of
thickening: edges formed with chicken wire, burlap, and resin,
filled with concrete; edges formed with chicken wire filled with
rubble, and then mortar, plaster; edges formed with brick, filled,
then plastered.
1061
A door frame as a thickening.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
More general examples of frames as thickened edges exist all
over the world. They include the thickening of the mud around
the windows of a mud hut, the use of stone edges to the opening
in a brick wall because the stone is stronger, the use of double
studs around an opening in stud construction, the extra stone
around the windows in a gothic church, the extra weaving round
the hole in any basket hut.
Therefore:
Do not consider door and window frames as separate
rigid structures which are inserted into holes in walls.
Think of them instead as thickenings of the very fabric of
the wall itself, made to protect the wall against the con-
centrations of stress which develop around openings.
In line with this conception, build the frames as thicken-
ings of the wall material, continuous with the wall itself,
made of the same materials, and poured, or built up, in a
manner which is continuous with the structure of the
wall.
In windows, splay the thickening, to create DEEP REVEALS
(223); the form of doors and windows which will fill the frame,
is given by the later patterns—WINDOWS WHICH OPEN WIDE
(236), SOLID DOORS WITH GLASS (237), SMALL PANES (239). . . .
IO62
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

as you build the mam frame and its openings, put in
the follovuing subsidiary patterns where they are
appropriate^
2.26. COLUMN PLACE
227. 
COLUMN CONNECTION
228. 
STAIR VAULT
229. 
DUCT SPACE
230. 
RADIANT HEAT
231. DORMER WINDOWS
232. 
ROOF CAPS
1063
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

226 COLUMN PLACE*
1064
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

Thin columns, spindly columns, columns which take
their shape from structural arguments alone, will never
make a comfortable environment.
The fact is, that a free-standing column plays a role in shaping
human space. It marks a point. Two or more together define a
wall or an enclosure. The main function of the columns, from a
human point of view, is to create a space for human activity.
In ancient times, the structural arguments for columns coin-
cided in their implications with the social arguments. Columns
made of brick, or stone, or timber were always large and thick,
It was easy to make useful space around them.
But with steel and reinforced concrete, it is possible to make
a very slender column; so slender that its social properties disap-
1065
. . . certain columns, especially those which are free standing,
play an important social role, beyond their structural role as
COLUMNS AT THE CORNERS (2x2). These are, especially, the
columns which help to form arcades, galleries, porches, walkways,
and outdoor rooms—PUBLIC OUTDOOR ROOM (69), ARCADES
(H9), OUTDOOR ROOM (163), GALLERY SURROUND (l66), SIX-
FOOT BALCONY (167), TRELLISED WALK (174). This pattern de-
fines the character these columns need to make them function
socially.
A big thick column.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
pear altogether. Four inch steel pipes or 6 inch reinforced con-
crete columns break up space, but they destroy it as a place for
human action, because they do not create "spots" where people
can be comfortable.
In these times, it is therefore necessary to reintroduce, con-
sciously, the social purposes which columns have, alongside their
structural functions. Let us try to define these social purposes
exactly.
A column affects a volume of space around it, according to the
situation. The space has an area that is roughly circular, perhaps
5 feet in radius.
When the column is too thin, or lacks a top or bottom, this entire
volume—an area of perhaps 75 square feet—is lost. It cannot be a
satisfactory place in its own right: the column is too thin to lean
against, there is no way to build a seat up against it, there is no
natural way to place a table or a chair against the column. On
the other hand, the column still breaks up the space. It subtly
prevents people from walking directly through that area: we notice
1066
Thin columns of the plastic world.
The space around the column.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

226 
COLUMN 
PLACE
that people tend to give these thin columns a wide berth; and it
prevents people from forming groups.
In short, if the column has to be there, it will destroy a
considerable area unless it is made to be a place where people
feel comfortable to stay, a natural focus, a place to sit down, a
place to lean.
Therefore:
When a column is free standing, make it as thick as a
man—at least 12 inches, preferably 16 inches: and form
places around it where people can sit and lean comfortably:
a step, a small seat built up against the column, or a space
formed by a pair of columns.
You can get the extra thickness quite cheaply if you build the
column as a BOX COLUMN (216); complete the "place" the col-
umn forms, by giving it a "roof in the form of a column capital,
or vault which springs from the column, or by bracing the column
against the beams—COLUMN CONNECTION (227). And when it
makes sense, make the column base a SITTING WALL (243), a place
for flowers—RAISED FLOWERS (245), or a place for a chair or
table 
DIFFERENT CHAIRS (251). . . .
1067
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

227 
COLUMN CONNECTIONS**
1068
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . the columns are in position, and have been tied together by
a perimeter beam—BOX COLUMNS (216), PERIMETER BEAMS
(217). According to the principles of continuity which govern the
basic structure—EFFICIENT STRUCTURE (206), the connections
need stiffening to lead the forces smoothly from the beams into
the columns, especially when the columns are free standing as
they are in an arcade or balcony—ARCADE (119), GALLERY SUR-
ROUND (l66), SIX-FOOT BALCONY (167), COLUMN PLACE (226).
You may also do the same in the upper corners of your door and
window frames—FRAMES AS THICKENED EDGES (225)—making
arched openings.
The strength of a structure depends on the strength of
its connections; and these connections are most critical of
all at corners, especially at the corners where the columns
meet the beams.
There are two entirely different ways of looking at a con-
nection :
1. As a source of rigidity, which can be strengthened by tri-
angulation, to prevent racking of the frame. This is a moment
connection: a brace. See the upper picture.
2. As a source of continuity, which helps the forces to flow
easily around the corner in the process of transferring loads by
changing the direction of the force. This is a continuity connec-
tion: a capital. See the lower picture.
j. A column connection as a brace.
As a building is erected, and throughout its life, it settles,
creating tiny stresses within the structure. When the settling is
uneven, as it most always is, the stresses are out of balance; there
is strain in every part of the building, whether or not that part of
the building was designed to accept strain and transmit the forces
on down to the ground. The parts of the building that are not
designed to carry these forces become the weak points of the
building subject to fracture and rupture.
1069
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
Effects of uneven stresses on a frame.
Rectangular frames, especially, have these cracks at the corners
because the transmission of the load is discontinuous there. To
solve this problem the frame must be braced—made into a
rigid frame that transmits the forces around it as a whole with-
out distorting. The bracing is required at any right-angled corner
between columns and beams or in the corners of door and window
frames.
2. A column connection as a capital.
This happens most effectively in an arch. The arch creates a
continuous body of compressive material, which transfers vertical
forces from one vertical axis to another. It works effectively be-
cause the line of action of a vertical force in a continuous com-
pressive medium spreads out downward at about 45 degrees.
And a column capital is, in this sense, acting as a small, under-
developed arch. It reduces the length of the beam—and so re-
duces bending stress. And it begins to provide the path for the
forces as they move from one vertical axis to another, through the
medium of the beam. The larger the capital, the better.
A capital that acts the same way as an arch.
A column connection will work best when it acts both as a
column capital and as a column brace. This means that it needs to
1070
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

227 
COLUMN CONNECTIONS
be thick and solid, like a capital, so that there is a lot of material
for the forces to travel through, and stiff and strong and com-
pletely continuous with the column and perimeter beam, like
the brace, so that it can work against shear and bending.
The bone structure, shown below uses both principles, to
transfer compressive stress from one strut to another, continuously,
throughout a three-dimensional space frame of struts. The struc-
ture is most massive at the connections, where the forces change
direction..
Connections inside a bone,
A similar column connection can be made integral with
poured hollow columns and beams. The forms for the connection 1
are gussets made of skin material: then fill the column and the
gussets and the beam in a continuous concrete pour.
Of all the patterns in the book, this is one of the most wide-
spread and has taken the greatest variety of outward forms
throughout the course of history. A solid wood capital on a wood
column, or a continuously poured column top, and arches of
stone, brick, or poured concrete are all examples. And, of course,
typical column capitals—a larger stone on a stone column or
typical gusset plate or brace—even if weak in some ways, also help
a great deal. But only relatively few of the historical column con-
nections succeed fully in acting both as braces and as capitals.
Therefore:
Build connections where the columns meet the beams.
Any distribution of material which fills the corner up will
do: fillets, gussets, column capitals, mushroom column, and
1071
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
most general of all, the arch, which connects column and
beam in a continuous curve.
The connection is one of the most natural places for ORNAMENT
(249): there is a wide variety of possible connections, carvings,
fretwork, painting, for this critical position. In certain cases, the
connection may act as an umbrella for a COLUMN 
PLACE
(226). . . .
1072
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

1073
228 
STAIR VAULT*
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . this pattern helps complete the rough shape and location
of stairs given by STAIRCASE AS A STAGE (133) and by STAIRCASE
VOLUME (195). If you want to build a conventional stair, you can
find what you need in any handbook. But how to build a stair in a
way which is consistent with the compressive structure of EFFI-
CIENT STRUCTURE (206), without using wood or steel or
concrete—GOOD MATERIALS (207) ?
Within a building technology which uses compressive
materials as much as possible, and excludes the use of
wood, it is natural to build stairs over a vaulted void, simply
to save weight and materials.
A concrete stair is usually made from precast pieces supported
by steel stringers; or it is formed in place, and then stripped
of its forms. But for the reasons already given in GOOD MA-
TERIALS (207), precast concrete and steel are undesirable ma-
terials to use—they call for modular planning; they are unpleasant
materials to touch, look at, and walk on; they are hard to work
with and modify in any relaxed way, since they call for special
tools.
Given the principles of EFFICIENT STRUCTURE (206), GOOD
MATERIALS (207), and GRADUAL STIFFENING (2O8), We Suggest
that stairs be made like FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219)—by mak-
ing a half-vault (to the slope of the stair), with lattice strips,
burlap, resin, chickenwire, and lightweight concrete. The steps
themselves can then be formed by using wood planks, or tiles,
as risers, and filling in the steps with trowelled concrete.
When we first wrote this pattern, we thought it was very doubt-
ful—and put it in mainly to be consistent with floor and roof
vaults. Since then we have built a vaulted stair. It is a great success
—beautiful—and we recommend it heartily.
Therefore:
Build a curved diagonal vault in the same way that you
1074
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

228 
STAIR VAULT
build your FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219). Once the vault
hardens, cover it with steps of lightweight concrete, trowel-
formed into position.
A lightweight concrete tread, colored, waxed, and polished can
be quite beautiful and soft enough to be comfortable—see FLOOR
SURFACE (233)—and will eventually take on the patina of wear
called for in SOFT TILE AND BRICK (248).
The vaulted space under the stair can be used as an ALCOVE
(l79) a CHILD CAVE (2O3), Or CLOSETS BETWEEN ROOMS (198).
If it is plastered, like a regular ceiling—see FLOOR-CEILING
VAULTS (219), it makes a much more pleasant and useful space
than the space under an ordinary stair.
1075
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

229 
DUCT SPACE
. . . in a building built according to the principles of EFFICIENT
STRUCTURE (206) and built with vaulted floors—FLOOR-CEILING
VAULTS (219), there is a triangular volume, unused, around the
edge of every room. This is the most natural place to put the
ducts.
You never know where pipes and conduits are; they
are buried somewhere in the walls; but where exactly are
they?
In most buildings electric conduits, plumbing, drains, gas
pipes, telephone wires, and so on, are buried in the walls, in a
completely uncoordinated and disorganized way. This makes the
initial construction of the building complicated since it is diffi-
cult to coordinate the installation of the various services with the
building of various parts of the building. It makes it difficult to
think about making any changes or additions to the building once
it is built since you don't know where the service lines are. And
it leaves a gap in our understanding of our surroundings: the or-
ganization of utilities and services in the buildings we live in are
a mystery to us.
We propose that all the services be located together and run
around the ceiling of each room in the spandrel between the
vaulted ceiling and the floor above—FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS
(219).
Heating and electrical conduits will be universal throughout
the building and should thus be run around every room. Plumbing
and gas lines will be around some rooms only. All lines will also
be concentrated vertically at the corners of rooms. Thus the lines
form vertical trunks from which horizontal loops spring. This
configuration of pipes and conduits is easy to understand and plug
into.
1076
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

229 
DUCT SPACE
All in one -place.
Therefore:
Make ducts to carry hot air conduit, plumbing, gas, and
other services in the triangular space, within the vault,
around the upper edge of every room. Connect the ducts
for different rooms by vertical ducts, in special chases, in
the corners of rooms. Build outlets and panels at intervals
along the duct for access to the conduits.
wall-ceiling triangle
Once the duct is in, you can fill up the triangle with light-
weight concrete—FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219). Place heating
panels along the surface of the triangle—RADIANT HEAT (230) ;
and place outlets for lights at frequent intervals below the duct,
with leads and conduits running down in rebates along the win-
dow frames—POOLS OF LIGHT (252). . . »
1077
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

2JO RADIANT HEAT*
. . . to complete 
WALL 
MEMBRANES (218), FLOOR-CEILING
VAULTS (219) and DUCT SPACE (229)} use a biologically sensible
heating system.
This pattern is a biologically precise formulation of the
intuition that sunlight and a hot blazing fire are the best
kinds of heat.
Heat can be transmitted by radiation (heat waves across empty
space), convection (flow in air or liquids by mixing of molecules
and hot air rising), and conduction (flow through a solid).
In most places, we get heat in all three ways from our environ-
ment: conducted heat from the solids we touch, convected heat
in the air around us, and radiated heat from those sources of
radiation in our line of sight.
Of the three, conducted heat is trivial, since any surface hot
enough to conduct heat to us directly is too hot for comfort.
As far as the other two are concerned—convected heat and ra-
diant heat—we may ask whether there is any biological difference
in their effects on human beings. In fact there is.
It turns out that people are most comfortable when they
receive radiant heat at a slightly higher temperature than the
temperature of the air around them. The two most primitive
examples of this situation are: (l) Outdoors, on a spring day
when the air is not too hot but the sun is shining. (2) Around
an open fire, on a cool evening.
Most people will recognize intuitively that these are two
unusually comfortable situations. And in view of the fact that we
evolved as organisms in the open air, with plenty of sun, it is
not surprising that this condition happens to be so comfortable
for us. It is built into our systems, biologically.
Unfortunately, it havens that many of the most widely used
heating systems ignore this basic fact.
1078
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

23O 
RADIANT HEAT
Hot air systems, and buried pipes, and the so-called hot
water "radiators" do transmit some of their heat to us by means
of radiation, but most of the heat we get from them comes
from convection. The air gets heated and warms us as it swirls
around us. But, as it does so it creates that very uncomfortable
stuffy, over-heated, dry sensation. When convection heaters are
warm enough to heat us we feel stifled. If we turn the heat
down, it gets too cold.
The conditions in which people feel most comfortable require
a subtle balance of converted heat and radiant heat. Experiments
have established that the most comfortable balance between the
two, occurs when the average radiant temperature is about two
degrees higher than the ambient temperature. To get the average
radiant temperature in a room, we measure the temperature of
all the visible surfaces in a room, multiply the area of each surface
by its temperature, add these up, and divide by the total area.
For comfort, this average radiant temperature needs to be about
two degrees higher than the air temperature.
Since some of the surfaces in a room (windows and outside
walls), will usually be cooler than the indoor air temperature,
this means that at least some surfaces must be considerably warmer
to get the average up.
An open fire, which has a small area of very high tempera-
ture, creates this condition in a cool room. The beautiful Aus-
trian and Swedish tiled stoves also do it very well. They are
massive stoves, made of clay bricks or tiles, with a tiny furnace
Austrian tiled stove.
1079
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
in the middle. A handful of twigs in the furnace give all their
heat to the clay of the stove itself, and this clay, like the earth,
keeps this heat and radiates it slowly over a period of many hours.
Radiant panels, with individual room control, and infrared
heaters hung from walls and ceilings, are possible high technol-
ogy sources of radiant heat. It is possible that sources of low-grade
radiant heat—like a hot water tank—might also work to very
much the same effect. Instead of insulating the tank, it might be
an excellent source of radiant heat, right in the center of the
house.
Therefore:
Choose a way of heating your space—especially those
rooms where people are going to gather when it is cold—
that is essentially a radiative process, where the heat comes
more from radiation than convection.
surfaces slightly wanner than air
If you have followed earlier patterns, you may have rooms
which have a vaulted ceiling, with a steeply sloping surface close
to the wall, and with the major ducts behind that surface—
FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219), DUCT SPACE (229). In this C3SC,
it is natural to put the radiant heating panels on that sloping
surface.
But it is also Very wonderful to make at least some part of the
radiant surfaces low enough so that seats can be built round them
and against them; on a cold day there is nothing better than a
seat against a warm stove—BUILT-IN SEATS (202). . . .
1080
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

231 DORMER WINDOWS*
1081
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . this pattern helps to complete SHELTERING 
ROOF (117).
If you have followed sheltering roof, your roof has living space
within it: and it must therefore have windows in it, to bring
light into the roof. This pattern is a special kind of WINDOW
PLACE (180), which completes the ROOF VAULTS (220), in these
situations.
We know from our discussion of SHELTERING ROOF
(117) that the top story of the building should be right
inside the roof, surrounded by it.
Obviously, if there is habitable space inside the roof, it must
have some kind of windows; skylights are not satisfactory as win-
dows-—except in studios or workshops—because they do not create
a connection between the inside and the outside world—WINDOWS
OVERLOOKING LIFE (192).
It is therefore natural to pierce the roof with windows; in
short, to build dormer windows. This simple, fundamental fact
would hardly need mentioning if it were not for the fact that
dormer windows have come to seem archaic and romantic. It is
important to emphasize how sensible and ordinary they are—
simply because people may not build them if they believe that
they are old fashioned and out of date.
Dormers make the roof livable. Aside from bringing in light
and air and the connection to the outside, they relieve the low
ceilings along the edge of the roofs and create alcoves and win-
dow places.
How should the dormers be constructed? Within the roof
vault we have described, the basket which forms the vault can
simply be continued to form the roof of the dormer, over a
frame of columns and perimeter beams which form the opening.
The other ways of building dormer windows depend on the
construction system you are using. Whatever you are using for lin-
tels, columns, and walls, can simply be modified and used in com-
bination to build the dormer.
1082
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

231 
DORMER WINDOWS
Therefore:
Wherever you have windows in the roof, make dormer
windows which are high enough to stand in, and frame
them like any other alcoves in the building.
Frame them like ALCOVES (179) and WINDOW PLACE (180)
with GRADUAL STIFFENING (2O8), COLUMNS AT THE CORNERS
(212), BOX COLUMNS (2l6), PERIMETER BEAMS (217), WALL
MEMBRANES (218), FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219), ROOF VAULTS
(22O) and FRAMES AS THICKENED EDGES (225).
Put WINDOWS WHICH OPEN WIDE (236) in them, and make
SMALL PANES (239). . . .
1083
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

232 ROOF CAPS
1084
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . and this pattern finishes the ROOF GARDENS (118) or the
ROOF VAULTS (220). Assume that you have built the roof vaults
—or at least that you have started to build up the splines which
will support the cloth which forms the vault. Or assume that you
have begun to build a roof garden, and have begun to fence it or
surround it. In either case—how shall the roof be finished?
There are few cases in traditional architecture where
builders have not used some roof detail to cap the building
with an ornament.
The pediments on Greek buildings; the caps on the trulli of
Alberobello; the top of Japanese shrines; the venting caps on
barns. In each of these examples there seems to be some issue
of the building system that needs resolution, and the builder
takes the opportunity to make a "cap."
We suspect there is a reason for this which should be taken
seriously. The roof cap helps to finish the building; it tops the
building with a human touch. Yet, the power of the cap, its
overall effect on the feeling of the building, is of much greater
proportions than one would expect. Look at these sketches of a
building, with and without a roof cap. They look like different
buildings. The difference is enormous.
With and without a roof cap.
Why is it that these caps are so important and have such a
powerful effect on the building as a whole?
Here are some possible reasons.
1. They crown the roof. They give the roof the status that
it deserves. The roof is important, and the caps emphasize this
fact.
2. They add detail. They make the roof less homogeneous, and
1085
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
they relieve the roof from being a single uninterrupted thing.
The walls get this relief from windows, doors, balconies, which
add scale and character; when a roof has many dormers, it seems
to need the caps less.
3. The caps provide a connection to the sky, in a way that
might have had religious overtones at one time. Just as the build-
ing needs a sense of connection to the earth—see CONNECTION
TO THE EARTH (168)—perhaps the roof needs a connection to
the sky.
In the building system we propose, the roof caps are weights
we use at the ridge of the roof to make the slight curve in the
pitched sides of the roof. They happen at regular intervals, at
the ridges of the scallops. They need not be large—a small bag
of sand or a stone will do, plastered with concrete and shaped so
the bulge is obvious. It may be nice to paint them a different
color from the roof.
Of course, there are hundreds of other possible kinds of roof
caps. They can be brick chimneys, statues, vents, structural
details, the pinnacles on a gothic buttress, weather vanes, or even
windmills.
Therefore:
Choose a natural way to cap the roof—some way which
is in keeping with the kind of construction, and the mean'
ing of the building. The caps may be structural; but their
main function is decorative—they mark the top—they
mark the place where the roof penetrates the sky.
connection to the sky _
Finish the roof caps any way you want, but don't forget
them—ORNAMENT (249). . . .
1086
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

-put in the surfaces and the indoor details;
233. FLOOR SURFACE
234. LAPPED OUTSIDE WALLS
235. SOFT INSIDE WALLS
236. WINDOWS WHICH OPEN WIDE
237. SOLID DOORS WITH GLASS
238. FILTERED LIGHT
239. SMALL PANES
240. HALF-INCH TRIM
1087
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

233 FLOOR SURFACE**
1088
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . this pattern tells you how to put the surface on the floors,
to finish the GROUND FLOOR SLAB (215) and FLOOR-CEILING
VAULTS (219). When properly made, the floor surfaces will also
help intensify the gradient of intimacy in the building—
INTIMACY GRADIENT (127).
We want the floor to be comfortable, warm to the touch,
inviting. But we also want it to be hard enough to resist
wear, and easy to clean.
When we think of floors, we think of wood floors. We hope,
if we can afford it, to have a wooden floor. Even in hot countries,
where tiles are beautiful, many people want hardwood floors
whenever they can afford them. But the wood floor, though it
seems so beautiful, does little to solve the fundamental problem
of floors. The fact is that a room in which there is a bare wood
floor, seems rather barren, forbidding, makes the room sound
hollow and unfurnished. To make the wooden floor nice, we put
down carpets. But then it is not really a wood floor at all. This
confusion makes it clear that the fundamental problem of "the
floor" has not been properly stated.
When we look at the problem honestly, we realize that the
wooden floor, and the wooden floor with a carpet on it, are both
rather uneven compromises. The bare wooden floor is too bare,
too hard to be comfortable; but not in fact hard enough to resist
wear particularly well if it is left uncovered—it scratches and
dents and splinters. And when the floor is covered with a
carpet, the whole point of the beauty of the wood is lost. You
cannot see it any more, except round the edges of the carpet;
and the carpet on the floor is certainly not hard enough to resist
any substantial wear. Furthermore, the most beautiful carpets,
handmade rugs and tapestries, are so delicate that they cannot
take very rough wear. The practice of walking on a Persian rug
with outdoor shoes on is a barbarian habit, never practiced by the
people who make those rugs, and know how to treat them—they
always take their shoes off. But the modern nylon and acrylic
rugs, machine-made for hard wear, lose all the sumptuousness and
1089
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
pleasure of the carpet: they are, as it were, soft kinds of concrete.
The problem cannot be solved. The conflict is fundamental.
The problem can only be avoided by making a clear distinction
in the house between those areas which have heavy traffic and
so need hard wearing surfaces which are easy to clean, and those
other areas which have only very light traffic, where people can
take off their shoes, and where lush, soft, beautiful rugs, pillows,
and tapestries can easily be spread.
Traditional Japanese houses and Russian houses solve the prob-
lem in exactly this way: they divide the floor into two zones—
serviceable and comfortable. They use very clean, and often pre-
cious materials in the comfortable zone, and often make the service-
able zone an extension of the street—that is, dirt, paving, and
so on. People take their shoes off, or put them on, when they pass
from one zone to the other.
The threshold between hard and soft.
We are not sure whether taking shoes off and on could become
a natural habit in our culture. But it still makes sense to zone the
house so that the floor material changes as one gets deeper into
the house. The pattern INTIMACY GRADIENT (127) calls for a
gradient of public, semi-public, and private rooms. It follows that
one wants the floor to get softer as one goes deeper into the
house—that is, the entrance and the kitchen are better floored
with a hard, serviceable surface, while the dining, family room,
and children's playrooms need a serviceable floor but with com-
fortable spots, and the bedrooms, studies, rooms of one's own
need soft comfortable floors, on which people can sit, lie, and walk
barefoot.
1090
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

233 
FLOOR SURFACE
What should the materials be? Of the hard and soft materials,
the hard is more of a problem. Since children are close to these
floors, as well as the soft ones, they must be warm to the touch,
—and at the same time they must be easy to clean. For these hard
floors, a "soft" concrete might work. It can be made serviceable
and pleasant at the same time if it is finished off with a light-
weight textured floor finish, which is relatively porous. It can be
made to wear and repel water by making the color integral with
the mix and by waxing and polishing after it is set. It is fairly
cheap and makes sense if the floor is a concrete floor anyway.
Other materials which would work as hard floors are earth, rubber
or cork tile, soft unbaked tile known as pastelleros in Peru—see
SOFT TILE AND BRICK (248)—and wood planks, but these mate-
rials are more expensive.
For soft materials, carpet is the most satisfactory—for sitting,
lying, and being close to the ground. We doubt that an improve-
ment can be made on it—in fact we guess that if a substitute is
used instead, it will eventually get carpeted over, anyway. This
means that the areas which are going to be carpeted might as
well have a cheap subfloor with matting laid wall to wall.
To emphasize the two zones, and to promote the taking off
and on of shoes from one zone to the next, we suggest that there
be a step up or a step down between the zones. This will help
tremendously in keeping each zone "pure," and it is sure to help
the activities in each zone.
Therefore:
Zone the house, or building, into two kinds of zones:
public zones, and private or more intimate zones. Use
hard materials like waxed, red polished concrete, tiles, or
hardwood in the public zones. In the more intimate zone,
use an underfloor of soft materials, like felt, cheap nylon
carpet, or straw matting, and cover it with cloths, and pil-
lows, and carpets, and tapestries. Make a clearly marked
edge between the two—perhaps even a step—so that people
can take their shoes off when they pass from the public to
the intimate.
1091
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
On the hard floor, you can use the same floor as you use on
outdoor paths and terraces—hand fired brick and tile—SOFT TILE
AND BRICK (248). On the soft intimate floors, use materials and
cloths that are rich in ornament and color—ORNAMENT (249),
WARM COLORS (250). . . .
1092
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

234 
LAPPED OUTSIDE WALLS
1093
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . this pattern finishes the WALL MEMBRANES (218), and ROOF
VAULTS (220). It defines the character of their outside surfaces.
The main function of a building's outside wall is to keep
weather out. It can only do this if the materials are joined
in such a way that they cooperate to make impervious
joints.
At the same time, the wall must be easy to maintain; and give
the people outside some chance of relating to it.
None of these functions can be very well managed by great
sheets of impervious material. These sheets, always in the same
plane, have tremendous problems at the joints. They require
highly complex, sophisticated gaskets and seals, and, in the end,
it is these seals and joints which fail.
Consider a variety of natural organisms: trees, fish, animals.
Broadly speaking, their outside coats are rough, and made of
large numbers of similar but not identical elements. And these
elements are placed so that they often overlap: the scales of a fish,
the fur of an animal, the crinkling of natural skin, the bark of a
tree. All these coats are made to be impervious and easy to repair.
In simple technologies, buildings follow suit. Lapped boards,
shingles, hung tiles, thatch, are all examples. Even stone and
brick though in one plane, are still in a sense lapped internally to
prevent cracks which run all the way through. And all of these
walls are made of many small elements, so that individual pieces
can be replaced as they are damaged or wear out.
Bear in mind then, as you choose an exterior wall finish, that
it should be a material which can be easily lapped against the
weather, which is made of elements that are easy to repair locally,
and which therefore can be maintained piecemeal, indefinitely.
And of course, whatever you choose, make it a surface which in-
vites you to touch it and lean up against it.
In making our filled lightweight concrete structures, we have
1094
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

234 LAPPED OUTSIDE WALLS
The internal structure of an imaginary lapped material.
used lapped boards as the exterior form work for the lightweight
concrete fill. And it is, of course, possible to use many other kinds
of external cladding if they are available and if one can afford
them. Slate, corrugated iron, ceramic tiles will produce excellent
shingled wall claddings, and can all be placed in such a way as to
provide exterior formwork for the pouring of a wall. It is also
conceivable (though we have no evidence for it), that scientists
might be able to create an oriented material whose internal crystal
or fiber structure is in effect "lapped," because all the split lines
run diagonally outward and downward.
Therefore:
Build up the exterior wall surface with materials that are
lapped against the weather: either "internally lapped," like
exterior plaster, or more literally lapped, like shingles and
boards and tiles. In either case, choose a material that is
easy to repair in little patches, inexpensively, so that little
by little, the wall can be maintained in good condition
indefinitely.
lapped elements
easy to repair
1095
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

235 
SOFT INSIDE WALLS*
1096
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . and this pattern finishes the inner surface of the WALL
MEMBRANES (218), and the under surface of FLOOR-CEILING
VAULTS (219). If it is possible to use a soft material for the inner
sheet of the wall membrane, then the wall will have the right
character built in from the beginning.
A wall which is too hard or too cold or too solid is un-
pleasant to touch; it makes decoration impossible, and
creates hollow echoes.
A very good material is soft white gypsum plaster. It is warm
in color (even though white), warm to the touch, soft enough to
take tacks and nails and hooks, easy to repair, and makes a
mellow sound, because its sound absorption capacity is reasonably
high.
However, cement plaster, though only slightly different—and
even confused with gypsum plaster—is opposite in all of these
respects. It is too hard to nail into comfortably; it is cold and
hard and rough to the touch; it has very low absorption acousti-
cally—that is, very high reflectance—which creates a harsh, hol-
low sound; and it is relatively hard to repair, because once a
crack forms in it, it is hard to make a repair that is homogeneous
with the original.
In general, we have found that modern construction has gone
more and more toward materials for inside walls that are hard
and smooth. This is partly an effort to make buildings clean and
impervious to human wear. But it is also because the kinds of ma-
terials used today are machine made—each piece perfect and
exactly the same.
Buildings made of these flawless, hard and smooth surfaces
leave us totally unrelated to them. We tend to stay away from
them not only because they are psychologically strange, but be-
cause in fact they are physically uncomfortable to lean against;
they have no give; they don't respond to us.
1097
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
The solution to the problem lies in the following:
1. Gypsum plaster as opposed to cement plaster. Soft baked
tiles as opposed to hard fired ones. When materials are porous
and low in density they are generally softer and warmer to the
touch.
2. Use materials which are granular and have natural texture,
and which can be used in small pieces, or in such a way that there
is repetition of the same small element. Walls finished in wood
have the quality—the wood itself has texture; boards repeat it
at a larger scale. Plaster has this character when it is hand finished.
First there is the granular quality of the plaster and then the
larger texture created by the motion of the human hand.
One of the most beautiful versions of this pattern is the one
used in Indian village houses. The walls are plastered, by hand,
with a mixture of cow dung and mud, which dries to a beautiful
soft finish and shows the five fingers of the plasterer's hand all
over the walls.
Cow dung •plaster in an Indian village house.
Therefore:
Make every inside surface warm to the touch, soft
enough to take small nails and tacks, and with a certain
slight "give" to the touch. Soft plaster is very good; textile
hangings, canework, weavings, also have this character.
And wood is fine, where you can afford it.
1098
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

235 SOFT INSIDE WALLS
soft to the touch
enough "give" for nails
In our own building system, we find it is worth putting on a
light skim coat of plaster over the inner surfaces of the WALL
MEMBRANE (2l8) and FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219). Wherever
finish plaster meets columns, and beams, and doors and window
frames, cover the joint with half-inch wooden trim—HALF-INCH
TRIM (240). . . .
1099
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

236 WINDOWS WHICH
OPEN WIDE*
I IOO
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . this pattern helps to complete WINDOW PLACE (180), WIN-
DOWS OVERLOOKING LIFE (192), and NATURAL DOORS AND WIN-
DOWS (22l).
Many buildings nowadays have no opening windows at
all; and many of the opening windows that people do
build, don't do the job that opening windows ought to do.
It is becoming the rule in modern design to seal up windows
and create "perfect" indoor climates with mechanical air condi-
tioning systems. This is crazy.
A window is your connection to the outside. It is a source of
fresh air; a simple way of changing the temperature, quickly,
when the room gets too hot or too cold; a place to hang out and
smell the air and trees and flowers and the weather; and a hole
through which people can talk to each other.
What is the best kind of window?
Double-hung windows cannot be fully opened—only half of
the total window area can ever be opened at once. And they often
get stuck—sometimes because they have been painted, sometimes
because their concealed operating system of cords, counter-weights,
and pulleys gets broken; it becomes such an effort to open them
that no one bothers.
Sliding windows have much of the same problem—only part of
the window area can be open, since one panel goes behind
another; and they often get stuck too.
The side hung casement is easy to open and close. It gives
the greatest range of openings, and so creates the greatest degree
of control over air and temperature; and it makes an opening
which is large enough to put your head and shoulders through.
It is the easiest window to climb in and out of too.
The old time French windows are a stunning example of this
pattern. They are narrow, full length upstairs windows, which
swing out onto a tiny balcony, large enough only to contain the
open windows. When you open them you fill the frame, and can
stand drinking in the air: they put you intensely close to the out-
I I O I
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
side—yet in a perfectly urban sense, as much in Paris or Madrid
as in the open countryside.
Therefore:
Decide which of the windows will be opening windows.
Pick those which are easy to get to, and choose the ones
which open onto flowers you want to smell, paths where
you might want to talk, and natural breezes. Then put in
side-hung casements that open outward. Here and there, go
all the way and build full French windows.
Complete the subframe of the casement with SMALL PANES
(239). . . .
noz
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

237 SOLID DOORS
WITH GLASS
. . . this pattern finishes the doors defined by CORNER DOORS
(196) and LOW DOORWAY (224). It also helps to finish TAPESTRY
OF LIGHT AND DARK (135) and INTERIOR WINDOWS (194), since it
requires glazing in the doors, and can help to create daylight in
the darker parts of indoor places.
An opaque door makes sense in a vast house or palace,
where every room is large enough to be a world unto itself;
but in a small building, with small rooms, the opaque door
is only very rarely useful.
What is needed is a kind of door which gives some sense of
visual connection together with the possibility of acoustic isola-
tion: a door which you can see through but can't hear through.
Glazed doors have been traditional in certain periods—they are
beautiful, and enlarge the sense of connection and make the life
in the house one, but still leave people the possibility of privacy
they need. A glazed door allows for a more graceful entrance into
a room and for a more graceful reception by people in the room,
because it allows both parties to get ready for each other. It also
allows for different degrees of privacy: You can leave the door
open, or you can shut it for ac'oustical privacy but maintain the
visual connection; or you can curtain the window for visual and
acoustic privacy. And, most important, it gives the feeling that
everyone in the building is connected—not isolated in private
rooms.
Therefore:
As often as possible build doors with glazing in them,
so that the upper half at least, allows you to see through
them. At the same tune, build the doors solid enough, so
1103
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
that they give acoustic isolation and make a comfortable
"thunk" when they are closed.
Glaze the door with small panes of glass—SMALL PANES (239);
and make the doors more solid, by building them like WALL MEM-
BRANES (218). . . .
1104.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

238 FILTERED LIGHT*
1105
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . even if the windows are beautifully placed, glare can still be
a problem—NATURAL DOORS AND WINDOWS (221). The softness
of the light, in and around the window, makes an enormous
difference to the room inside. The shape of the frames can do a
part of it—DEEP REVEALS (223)—but it still needs additional
help.
Light filtered through leaves, or tracery, is wonderful.
But why?
We know that light filtering through a leafy tree is very
pleasant—it lends excitement, cheerfulness, gaiety; and we know
that areas of uniform lighting create dull, uninteresting spaces.
But why?
1. The most obvious reason: direct light coming from a point
source casts strong shadows, resulting in harsh images with strong
contrasts. And people have an optical habit which makes this con-
trast worse: our eye automatically reinforces boundaries so that
they read sharper than they are. For example, a color chart with
strips of different colors set next to each other will appear as
though there are dark lines between the strips. These contrasts
and hard boundaries are unpleasant—objects appear to have a
hard character, and our eyes, unable to adjust to the contrast,
cannot pick up the details.
For all these reasons, we have a natural desire to diffuse light
with lamp shades or indirect lighting, so that the images created
by the light will be "softer," that is, that the boundaries perceived
are not sharp, there is less contrast, fewer shadows, and the details
are easier to see. This is also why photographers use reflected
light instead of direct light when photographing objects; they
pick up details which otherwise would be lost in shadow.
2. The second reason: to reduce the glare around the window.
When there is bright light coming in through the window, it
creates glare against the darkness of the wall around the window
—see DEEP REVEALS (223). Filtering the light especially at the
1106
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

238 
FILTERED LIGHT
edges of the window cuts down the glare by letting in less
light.
3. A third reason which is pure conjecture: it may simply be
that an object which has small scale patterns of light dancing on
it is sensually pleasing, and stimulates us biologically. Some film-
makers claim the play of light upon the- retina is naturally sensu-
ous, all by itself.
To create filtered light, partially cover those windows which
get direct sunlight, with vines and lattices. Leaves are special
because they move. And the edge of the window can have fine
tracery—that is, the edge of the glass itself, not the frame, so
that the light coming in is gradually stronger from the edge to
the center of the window j the tracery is best toward the top of
the window where the light is strongest. Many old windows
combine these ideas.
Therefore:
Where the edge of a window or the overhanging eave of
a roof is silhouetted against the sky, make a rich, detailed
taspestry of light and dark, to break up the light and
soften it.
You can do this, most easily, with climbing plants trained to
climb around the outside of the window—CLIMBING PLANTS
(246). If there are no plants, you can also do it beautifully with
simple canvas awnings—CANVAS ROOFS (244), perhaps colored—
WARM COLORS (250). You can also help to filter light by making
the panes smaller, more delicate, and more elaborate high in the
window where the light is strong—SMALL PANES (239). . . .
1107
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

239 
SMALL PANES**
1108
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . this pattern gives the glazing for the windows in INTERIOR
WINDOWS (194), NATURAL DOORS AND WINDOWS (221), WINDOWS
WHICH OPEN WIDE (236), and SOLID DOORS WITH 
GLASS (237).
In most cases, the glazing can be built as a continuation of the
FRAMES AS THICKENED EDGES (225).
When plate glass windows became possible, people
thought that they would put us more directly in touch
with nature. In fact, they do the opposite.
They alienate us from the view. The smaller the windows are,
and the smaller the panes are, the more intensely windows help
connect us with what is on the other side.
This is an important paradox. The clear plate window seems
as though it ought to bring nature closer to us, just because it
seems to be more like an opening, more like the air. But, in fact,
our contact with the view, our contact with the things we see
through windows is affected by the way the window frames them.
When we consider a window as an eye through which to see a
view, we must recognize that it is the extent to which the window
frames the view, that increases the view, increases its intensity,
increases its variety, even increases the number of views we seem
to see—and it is because of this that windows which are broken
into smaller windows, and windows which are filled with tiny
panes, put us so intimately in touch with what is on the other
side. It is because they create far more frames: and it is the multi-
tude of frames which makes the view.
Thomas Markus, who has studied windows extensively, has
arrived at the same conclusion: windows which are broken up
make for more interesting views. ("The Function of Windows—
A Reappraisal," Building Science, Vol. 2, 1967, pp. 101-4).
He points out that small and narrow windows afford different
views from different positions in the room, while the view tends
to be the same through large windows or horizontal ones.
We believe that the same thing, almost exactly, happens
1109
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
within the window frame itself. The following picture shows
a simple landscape, broken up as it might be by six panes. In-
stead of one view, we see six views. The view becomes alive
because the small panes make it so.
Six views.
Another argument for small panes: Modern architecture and
building have deliberately tried to make windows less like
windows and more as though there was nothing between you and
the outdoors. Yet this entirely contradicts the nature of windows.
It is the function of windows to offer a view and provide a rela-
tionship to the outside, true. But this does not mean that they
should not at the same time, like the walls and roof, give you a
sense of protection and shelter from the outside. It is uncom-
fortable to feel that there is nothing between you and the outside,
when in fact you are inside a building. It is the nature of win-
dows to give you a relationship to the outside and at the same
time give a sense of enclosure.
Small -panes in Mendocino.
IIIO
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

239 
SMALL PANES
Not only that. Big areas of clear glass are sometimes even
dangerous. People walk into plate glass windows, because they
look like air. By comparison, windows with small panes give a
dear functional message—the frames of the panes definitely tell
you that something is there separating you from the outside. And
they help to create FILTERED LIGHT (238).
Therefore:
Divide each window into small panes. These panes can
be very small indeed, and should hardly ever be more than
a foot square. To get the exact size of the panes, divide
the width and height of the window by the number of
panes. Then each window will have different sized panes
according to its height and width.
In certain cases you may want to make the small panes even
finer near the window edge, to filter the light around the upper
edge of windows which stand out against the sky—FILTERED
LIGHT (238). As for the muntins, they can be made from the
same materials as trim—HALF-INCH TRIM (240). . . .
mi
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

24O HALF-INCH TRIM**
II 12
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . and this pattern finishes the joints between SOFT INSIDE
WALLS (235), or LAPPED OUTSIDE WALLS (234) and the various
floors and vaults and frames and stiffeners and ornaments which
are set into the walls: BOX COLUMNS (216), PERIMETER BEAMS
(217), FLOOR-CEILING VAULTS (219), FRAMES AS THICKENED
EDGES (225), and ORNAMENT (249).
Totalitarian, machine buildings do not require trim be-
cause they are precise enough to do without But they buy
their precision at a dreadful price: by killing the possibility
of freedom in the building plan.
A free and natural building cannot be conceived without the
possibility of finishing it with trim, to cover up the minor varia-
tions which have arisen in the plan, and during its construction.
For example, when nailing a piece of gypsum board to a
column—if the board is cut on site—it is essential that the cut
can be inaccurate within a half-inch or so. If it has to be more
accurate, there will be a great waste of material, and on-site
cutting time and labor will increase, and, finally, the very possi-
bility of adapting each part of the building to the exact subtleties
of the plan and site will be in jeopardy.
It is in response to difficulties of this sort that modern system
building has arisen. Here tolerances are very low indeed—J^
inch and even lower—and there is no need for trim to coyer up
inaccuracies. However, the precision of the components can only
be obtained by the most tyrannical control over the plan. This
one aspect of construction has by itself destroyed the builder's
capacity to make a building which is natural, organic, and adapted
to the site.
If, as we suggest, the building procedure is looser and allows
much larger tolerance—even mistakes on the order of half an inch
or more—then the use of trim to cover the connection between
materials becomes essential. Indeed, within this attitude to build-
ing, the trim is not a trivial decoration added as a finishing
touch, but an essential phase of the construction. We see, then,
1113
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
that trim, so often associated with older buildings, and treated as
an emblem of nostalgia, is in fact a vital part of the process of
making buildings natural.
Finally, it is worth adding a note about the actual size of the
trim pieces. Buildings built in the last 25 years often make a
virtue out of boldness, and there is a tendency to use very large
oversized pieces of trim instead of small pieces. Within the
framework of this philosophy, it might seem right to use pieces
of trim 2 or 3 inches thick for their effect and heaviness. We
believe that this is wrong: Trim which is too large, or too
thick, doesn't do its job. This is not a matter of style. There is a
psychological reason for making sure that every component in the
building has at least some pieces of trim which are of the order
of half an inch or an inch thick, and no more.
Compare the following two examples of trim. For some reason
the right-hand one, in which the trim is finer, is closer and
better adapted to our feelings than the left-hand one.
Chunky trim ..... fine scale trim,
The reason for this seems to be the following. Our own bodies
and the natural surroundings in which we evolved contain a
continuous hierarchy of details, ranging all the way from the
molecular fine structure to gross features like arms and legs (in
our own bodies) and trunks and branches (in our natural sur-
roundings) .
We know from results in cognitive psychology that any one step
in this hierarchy can be no more than 115, I :y, or I :io if we are
to perceive it as a natural hierarchy. We cannot understand a
hierarchy in which there is a jump in scale of 1:20 or more. It
is this fact which makes it necessary for our surroundings, even
when man-made, to display a similar continuum of detail.
Most materials have some kind of natural fibrous or crystalline
1114
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

24O 
HALF-INCH 
TRIM
structure at the scale of about %Q inch. But if the smallest
building detail dimensions are of the order of 2 or 3 inches, this
leaves a jump of 1:40 or 1:6o between these details and the fine
structure of the material.
In order to allow us to perceive a connection between the fine
building construction and the fine structure of the materials, it is
essential that the smallest building details be of the order of a
half inch or so, so that it is no more than about 10 times the size
of the granular and fibrous texture of the materials.
Therefore:
Wherever two materials meet, place a piece of trim over
the edge of the connection. Choose the pieces of trim so
that the smallest piece, in each component, is always of
the order of
 l/2 inch wide. The trim can be wood, plaster,
terracotta. . . .
In many cases, you may be able to use the trim to form the
ornaments—ORNAMENT (249) ; and trims may occasionally be
colored r even tiny amounts can help to make the light in a room
warm—WARM COLORS (250). . . .
1115
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

This page intentionally left blank 
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

build outdoor details to finish the outdoors as fully
as the indoor spaces,
241. SEAT SPOTS
242. 
FRONT DOOR BENCH
243. 
SITTING WALL
244. 
CANVAS ROOFS
245. 
RAISED FLOWERS
246. 
CLIMBING PLANTS
247. 
PAVING WITH CRACKS BETWEEN
THE STONES
248. 
SOFT TILE AND BRICK
I I I 7
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

241 SEAT SPOTS**
1118
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . assume that the main structure of the building is complete.
To make it perfectly complete you need to build in the details of
the gardens and the terraces around the building. In some cases,
you will probably have la,id out the walk and flowers and seats, at
least in rough outline; but it is usually best to make the final
decisions about them after the building is really there—so that
you can make them fit the building and help to tie it into its
surroundings—PATH SHAPE (121), ACTIVITY POCKETS (124),
PRIVATE TERRACE ON THE STREET (140), BUILDING EDGE (l6o),
SUNNY PLACE (l6l), OUTDOOR ROOM (163), CONNECTION TO THE
EARTH (l68), TRELLISED WALK (174), GARDEN SEAT (176), etc.
First, the outdoor seats, public and private.
Where outdoor seats are set down without regard for
view and climate, they will almost certainly be useless.
We made random spot checks on selected benches in Berkeley,
California, and recorded these facts about each bench: Was it
occupied or empty? Did it give a view of current activity or not?
Was it in the sun or not? What was the current wind velocity?
Three of the eleven benches were occupied; eight were empty.
At the moment of observation, all three occupied benches
looked onto activity, were in the sun, and had,a wind velocity of
less than 1.5 feet per second. At the moment of observation, none
of the eight empty benches had all three of these characteristics.
Three of them had shelter and activity but no sun; three of
them had activity but no sun, and wind greater than 3 feet per
second; two of them had sun and shelter but no activity.
A second series of observations compared the numbers of old
people sitting in Union Square at 3:00 P.M. on a sunny day with
the number at 3:00 P.M. on a cloudy day: 65 people on the
sunny day and 21 on the cloudy day, even though the air tem-
perature was the same on both days.
It's obvious, of course—but the point is this—when you are
going to mark in spots in your project for the location of outdoor
1119
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

seats, sitting walls, stair seats, garden seats, look for places with
these characteristics:
1. Benches facing directly onto pedestrian activity.
2. Benches open to the south for sun exposure during winter
months.
3. A wall on those sides where the winter wind comes down.
4. In hot climates—cover to give sun protection during the
midday hours of summer months, and the bench open to the
direction of the summer breeze.
New England benches.
Therefore:
Choosing good spots for outdoor seats is far more im-
portant than building fancy benches. Indeed, if the spot
is right, the most simple kind of seat is perfect.
In cool climates, choose them to face the sun, and to be
protected from the wind; in hot climates, put them in shade
and open to summer breezes. In both cases, place them to
face activities.
1120
If these seats can be made continuous with stairs or building
entrances or low walls or ballustrades, so much the better—
STAIR SEATS (125), FRONT DOOR BENCH (242), SITTING WALL
(243). . . .
CONSTRUCTION
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

242 
FRONT DOOR BENCH
I I 2 I
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . SEAT SPOTS (241), acting within several larger patterns,
creates an atmosphere around the edge of the building which
invites lingering—ARCADES (119), 
BUILDING 
EDGE (160),
SUNNY PLACE (l6l), CONNECTION TO THE EARTH (l68)j it is
most marked and most important near the entrance—ENTRANCE
ROOM (130). This pattern defines a special SEAT SPOT (241): a
bench which helps to form the entrance room and the building
edge around the entrance. It is always important; but perhaps
most important of all, at the door of an OLD AGE COTTAGE (155).
People like to watch the street.
But they do not always want a great deal of involvement with
the street. The process of hanging out requires a continuum of
degrees of involvement with the street, ranging all the way from
the most private kind to the most public kind. A young girl
watching the street may want to be able to withdraw the moment
anyone looks at her too intently. At other times people may want
to be watching the street, near enough to it to talk to someone
who comes past, yet still protected enough so that they can with-
draw into their own domain at a moment's notice.
The most public kind of involvement with the street is sitting
out. Many people, especially older people, pull chairs out to the
front door or lean against the front of their houses, either while
front door benches in Peru.
1122
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

242 
FRONT DOOR BENCH
they are working at something or just for the pleasure of watch-
ing street life. But since there is some reluctance to be too public,
this activity requires a bench or seat which is clearly private,
even though in the public world. It is best of all when the
bench is placed so that people are sitting on the edge of their
world on private land—yet so placed that the personal space it
creates overlaps with land that is legally public.
Therefore:
Build a special bench outside the front door where
people from inside can sit comfortably for hours on end
and watch the world go by. Place the bench to define a
half-private domain in front of the house. A low wall, plant-
ing, a tree, can help to create the same domain.
The bench may help to make the entrance visible—MAIN EN-
TRANCE (no); it can be part of a wall—SITTING WALL (243))
with flowers in the sunshine next to it—RAISED FLOWERS (245).
Place it with care, according to the rules given, in SEAT SPOTS
(HI)
1123
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

243 
SITTING WALL**
1124
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . if all is well, the outdoor areas are largely made up of
positive spaces—POSITIVE OUTDOOR SPACES (106) ; in some fashion
you have marked boundaries between gardens and streets, between
terraces and gardens, between outdoor rooms and terraces, be-
tween play areas and gardens—GREEN STREETS (51), PEDESTRIAN
STREET (lOO), HALF-HIDDEN GARDEN (ill), HIERARCHY OF
OPEN SPACE (lI4), PATH SHAPE (l2l), ACTIVITY POCKETS
(124), PRIVATE TERRACE ON THE STREET (140), OUTDOOR
ROOM (163), OPENING TO THE STREET (165), GALLERY SUR-
ROUND (166), GARDEN GROWING WILD (172). With this pattern,
you can help these natural boundaries take on their proper char-
acter, by building walls, just low enough to sit on, and high
enough to mark the boundaries.
If you have also marked the places where it makes sense to
build seats—SEAT SPOTS (241), FRONT DOOR BENCH (242)—you
can kill two birds with one stone by using the walls as seats which
help enclose the outdoor space wherever its positive character is
weakest.
In many places walls and fences between outdoor spaces
are too high; but no boundary at all does injustice to the
subtlety of the divisions between the spaces.
Consider, for example, a garden on a quiet street. At least
somewhere along the edge between the two there is a need for a
seam, a place which unites the two, but does so without breaking
down the fact that they are separate places. If there is a high
wall or a hedge, then the people in the garden have no way
of being connected to the street; the people in the street have
no way of being connected to the garden. But if there is no
barrier at all—then the division between the two is hard to
maintain/Stray dogs can wander in and out at will; it is even
uncomfortable to sit in the garden, because it is essentially like
sitting in the street.
1125
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
The problem can only be solved by a kind of barrier which
functions as a barrier which separates, and as a seam which joins,
at the same time.
A low wall or balustrade, just at the right height for sitting,
is perfect. It creates a barrier which separates. But because it in-
vites people to sit on it—invites them to sit first with their legs
on one side, then with their legs on top, then to swivel round
still further to the other side, or to sit astride it—it also functions
as a seam, which makes a positive connection between the two
places.
Examples: A low wall with the children's sandbox on one side,
circulation path on the other; low wall at the front of the garden,
connecting the house to the public path; a sitting wall that is a
retaining wall, with plants on one side, where people can sit
close to the flowers and eat their lunch.
Ruskin describes a sitting wall he experienced:
Last summer I was lodging for a little while in a cottage in the
country, and in front of my low window there were, first, some beds
of daisies, then a row of gooseberry and currant bushes, and then
a low wall about three feet above the ground, covered with stone-
cress. Outside, a corn-field, with its green ears glistening in the sun,
and a field path through it, just past the garden gate. From my
window I could see every peasant of the village who passed that
way, with basket on arm for market, or spade on shoulder for field.
When I was inclined for society, I could lean over my wall, and
talk to anybody; when I was inclined for science, I could botanize
all along the top of my wall—there were four species of stone-cress
alone growing on it; and when I was inclined for exercise, I could
jump over my wall, backwards and forwards. That's the sort of
fence to have in a Christian country; not a thing which you can't
walk inside of without making yourself look like a wild beast, nor
look at out of your window in the morning without expecting to
see somebody impaled upon it in the night. (John Ruskin, The Two
Pathsy New York: Everyman's Library, 1907, p. 203.)
Therefore:
Surround any natural outdoor area, and make minor
boundaries between outdoor areas with low walls, about
16 inches high, and wide enough to sit on, at least 12
inches wide.
1126
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

243 
SITTING WALL
Place the walls to coincide with natural seat spots, so that
extra benches are not necessary—SEAT SPOTS (241); make them
of brick or tile, if possible-—SOFT TILE AND BRICK (248) j if they
separate two areas of slightly different height, pierce them with
holes to make them balustrades-—ORNAMENT 3(249). Where they
are in the sun, and can be large enough, plant flowers in them
or against them—RAISED FLOWERS (245). . . .
1127
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

244 CANVAS ROOFS*
1128
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . around every building there are ROOF GARDENS (118),
ARCADES (119), PRIVATE TERRACES ON THE STREET (14.0),
OUTDOOR ROOMS (163), GALLERY SURROUNDS (l66), TRELL1SED
WALKS (174), and WINDOW PLACES (180), even SMALL PARKING
LOTS (103), which all become more subtle and more beautiful
with canvas roofs and awnings. And the awnings always help to
create FILTERED LIGHT (238).
There is a very special beauty about tents and canvas
awnings. The canvas has a softness, a suppleness, which is
in harmony with wind and light and sun. A house or
any building built with some canvas will touch all the ele-
ments more nearly than it can when it is made only with
hard conventional materials.
In conventional building, it is easy to think that walls and
roofs must either be solid, or missing altogether. But cloth and
canvas lie just exactly halfway in between. They are translucent,
let a little breeze pass through, and they are very cheap, and easy
to roll up and easy to pull down.
We can identify three kinds of places that need these properties:
1. Awnings—sunshades over windows, retractable, and used to
filter very bright hot sunlight.
2. Curtains—moveable, half-open walls on outdoor rooms, bal-
conies, and galleries—places that are occupied mainly during the
day, but might benefit from extra wind protection.
3. Tent-like roofs on outdoor rooms—a tent which ca.n hold
off a drizzle and make outdoor rooms, or trellises, or courtyards
habitable in the spring and autumn and at night.
Here is Frank Lloyd Wright describing his use of the canvas
roof in the very early structures at Taliesin West:
. . . the Taliesin Fellowship (is a) desert camp on a great Arizona
mesa which the boys, together with myself, are now building to
work and live in during the winter-time. Many of the building units
have canvas tops carried by red-wood framing resting on massive
1129
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
stone walls made by placing the flat desert stones into wood boxes
and throwing in stones and concrete behind them. Most of the canvas
frames may be opened or kept closed. . . . The canvas overhead
being translucent, there is a very beautiful light to live and work in;
I have experienced nothing like it elsewhere except in Japan some-
what, in their houses with sliding paper walls or "shoji." (The
Future of Architecture, London: The Architectural Press, 1955, pp.
255-56.)
Another example: In Italy, the canvas awning is used quite
commonly as a simple awning over south and west windows. The
canvas is often a bright and beautiful orange, giving color to the
street and a warm glow to the interior rooms.
As a final example, we report on our own use of this pattern
in the housing project in Lima. We roofed interior patios with
movable canvas material. In hot weather the covers are rolled back,
and a breeze blows through the house. In cold weather, the
canvas is rolled out, sealing the house, and the patio is still
useful. In Lima, there is a winter dew which normally makes
patio floors damp and cold for eight months in the year. The
cover on the patios keeps them dry and warm and triples their
useful life. They eliminate the need for glass windows almost
entirely. The windows which look into patios give light to rooms
and may be curtained for visual control—but since the cold and
damp are kept out by the patio canvas there need be no glass
in the windows and no expensive moving parts.
Our -patio covers in Peru.
Therefore:
Build canvas roofs and walls and awnings wherever there
are spaces which need softer light or partial shade in sum-
1130
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

244 
CANVAS ROOFS
mer, or partial protection from mist and dew in autumn
and winter. Build them to fold away, with ropes or wires
to pull them, so that they can easily be opened.
Use the canvas awnings, especially, to filter light over those
windows which face west and south and glare because they face
the sky—FILTERED LIGHT (238). Colored canvas will add
special life—ORNAMENT (249), WARM COLORS (250). ... .
1131
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

245 
RAISED FLOWERS*
1132
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . outdoors there are various low walls at sitting height—
SITTING WALL (243) } terraced gardens, if the garden has a nat-
ural slope in it—TERRACED SLOPE (169); and paths and steps
and crinkled building edges—PATHS AND GOALS (120), STAIR
SEATS (125), BUILDING EDGE (l6o), GARDEN WALL (173).
These are the best spots for flowers, and flowers help to make
them beautiful.
Flowers are beautiful along the edges of paths, buildings,
outdoor rooms—but it is just in these places that they
need the most protection from traffic. Without some pro-
tection they cannot easily survive.
Look at the positions that wildflowers take in nature. They
are as a rule in protected places when they occur in massive quan-
tities: places away from traffic—often on grassy banks, on corners
of fields, against a wall. It is not natural for flowers to grow in
bundles like flower beds; they need a place to nestle.
What are the issues?
1. The sun—they need plenty of sun.
2. A position where people can smell and touch them.
3. Protection from stray animals.
4. A position where people see them, either from inside a
house or along the paths which they naturally pass coming and
going.
Typical flower borders are often too deep and too exposed.
And they are so low the flowers are out of reach. Concrete
planter boxes made to protect flowers often go to the other ex-
treme. They are so protected that people have no contact with
them, except from a distance. This is next to useless. The flowers
need to be close, where you can touch them, smell them.
Therefore, instead of putting the flowers in low borders, on
the ground, where people walk, or in massive concrete tubs, build
them up in low beds, with sitting walls beside them, along the
sides of paths, around entrances and edges. Make quite certain
"33
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
that the flowers are placed in positions where people really can
enjoy them—and not simply as ornament: outside favorite win-
dows, along traveled paths, near entrances and round doorways,
by outdoor seats.
Raised flowers.
Therefore:
Soften the edges of buildings, paths, and outdoor areas
with flowers. Raise the flower beds so that people can
touch the flowers, bend to smell them, and sit by them.
And build the flower beds with solid edges, so that people
can sit on them, among the flowers too.
"34
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

246 
CLIMBING PLANTS
"35
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . two earlier patterns can be helped by climbing plants
around the building: TRELLISED WALK (174) and FILTERED
LIGHT (238).
A building finally becomes a part of its surroundings
when the plants grow over parts of it as freely as they
grow along the ground.
There is no doubt that buildings with roses or vines or honey-
suckle growing on them mean much more to us than buildings
whose walls are blank and bare. That is reason enough to plant
wild clematis around the outside of a building, to make boxes to
encourage plants to grow at higher storys, and to make frames
and trellises for them to climb on.
We can think of four ways to ground this intuition in func-
tion.
1. One argument, consistent with others in the book, is that
climbing plants effect a smooth transition between the built and
the natural. A sort of blurring of the edges.
2. The quality of light. When the plants grow around the
openings of buildings, they create a special kind of filtered light
inside. This light is soft, reduces glare, and stark shadows—-
FILTERED LIGHT (238).
3. The sense of touch. Climbing and hanging plants also give
the outside walls a close and subtle texture. The same kind of
texture can be achieved in the building materials, but it is
uniquely beautiful when it comes from a vine growing across a
wall or winding around the eaves of an arcade. Then, the texture
invites you to touch and smell it, to pick off a leaf. Perhaps most
important, the texture of climbing plants is ever different; it is
subtly different from day to day, as the wind and sun play upon
it; and it is greatly different from season to season.
4. Tending the plants. When they are well-tended, healthy
plants and flowers growing around the windows and out of
flower boxes in the upper storys, make the street feel more
1136
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

246 CLIMBING PLANTS
comfortable. They bespeak a social order of some repose within
the buildings, and therefore it is comfortable to be on the streets
—one feels at home. It is as if the plants were a gift from the
people inside to people on the street.
The contribution to the street.
Therefore:
On sunny walls, train climbing plants to grow up round
the openings in the wall—the windows, doors, porches,
arcades, and trellises.
1137
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

247 
PAVING WITH CRACKS
BETWEEN THE STONES**
1138
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . many patterns call for paths and terraces and places where
the outdoor areas around a building feel connected to the
earth—GREEN STREETS (51), PATH 
SHAPE (121), PRIVATE
TERRACE ON THE STREET (140), OUTDOOR ROOM (163), CON-
NECTION TO THE EARTH (l68), TERRACED SLOPE (169). This
pattern provides a way of building the ground surface that makes
these larger patterns come to life.
Asphalt and concrete surfaces outdoors are easy to wash
down, but they do nothing for us, nothing for the paths,
and nothing for the rainwater and plants.
Look at a simple path, made by laying bricks or paving stones
directly in the earth, with ample cracks between the stones. It is
good to walk on, good for the plants, good for the passage of
time, good for the rain. You walk from stone to stone, and feel
the earth directly under foot. It does not crack, because as the
earth settles, the stones move with the earth and gradually take
on a rich uneven character. As time goes by, the very age and
history of all the moments on that path are almost recorded in
its slight unevenness. Plants and mosses and small flowers grow be-
tween the cracks. The cracks also help preserve the delicate
ecology of worms and insects and beetles and the variety of plant
species. And when it rains, the water goes directly to the ground;
there is no concentrated run-off, no danger of erosion, no loss
of water in the ground around the path.
All these are good reasons to set paving stones loosely. As for
the flat, smooth, hard concrete and asphalt surfaces, they have
almost nothing to recommend them. They are built when people
forget these small advantages that come about when paving is
made out of individual stones with cracks between the stones.
Therefore:
On paths and terraces, lay paving stones with a i inch
crack between the stones, so that grass and mosses and
"39
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
small flowers can grow between the stones. Lay the stones
directly into earth, not into mortar, and, of course, use no
cement or mortar in between the stones.
Use paving with cracks, to help make paths and terraces which
change and show the passage of time and so help people feel the
earth beneath their feet—CONNECTION TO THE EARTH (168);
the stones themselves are best if they are simple soft baked tiles—
SOFT TILE AND BRICK (248). . . .
II4O
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

248 
SOFT TILE AND BRICK
. . . several patterns call for the use of tiles and bricks—
CONNECTION TO THE EARTH (l68), GOOD MATERIALS (207),
FLOOR SURFACE (23 3), SITTING WALL (243), PAVING WITH
CRACKS BETWEEN THE STONES (247).
How can a person feel the earth, or time, or any connec-
tion with his surroundings, when he is walking on the
hard mechanical wash-easy surfaces of concrete, asphalt,
hard-fired architectural paving bricks, or artificially con-
cocted mixes like terrazo.
It is essential, above all, that the ground level surfaces we
walk on—both around our buildings and indoors in those places
like passages and kitchens where the floor has to be hard—be soft
enough, at least, to show the passage of time, in gradual undula-
tions and unevenness, that tell the story of a thousand passing
feet, and make it clear that buildings are like people—not
impervious and alien, but alive, changing with time, remembering
the paths which people tread.
Nothing shows the passage of time so well as very soft, baked
or lightly fired, bricks and tiles. They are among the cheapest
tiles that can be made; they use ordinary clay, are biodegrad-
able, and always develop a beautiful sense of wear and time in
the undulations made by people walking over them.
In addition, those paved areas around a building required by
CONNECTION TO THE EARTH (168) play a special role. They are
the places which are halfway between the building—with its
artificial materials—and the earth—which is entirely natural.
To make this connection felt, the materials themselves must also
be halfway, in character, between the building and the earth.
Again, soft, lightly fixed tiles are most appropriate.
1141
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
We consider this so important, that we advocate, specifically,
that the people who are making the building, make the quantity
of bricks and tiles they need for ground floor and outdoor sur-
faces—and that these be made in local clay and soft fired, in
stacks, right on the site.
It is easy to do. We shall now give detailed instructions for
making the tiles themselves and for making a rudimentary out-
door firing pit.
We start with the clay: it would be best to make one's own
clay from scratch.
Clay is decomposed feldspathic rock. There is an abundance of it
all over the earth. One may be fortunate enough to find it in one's
back yard.
To test whether it is clay, pick up a bit of it and wet it. If it is
plastic and sticky enough to form a smooth ball, it is clay. . . .
Process the clay as follows:
1. First, remove impurities such as twigs, leaves, roots and stones.
2. Then, let the chunks dry in the sun.
3. Break up these chunks and grind them up as finely as possible.
4. Put this ground-up clay in water so that there is a mound
above water.
5. Let this mixture soak for one day, then stir it, and sieve it
through a screen.
6. Let stand again for another day, and remove excess water.
7. Then put the clay in a plaster container j plaster absorbs water,
thus stiffening the mixture into workable clay.
8. Work the clay a little to test it. If cracks appear, it is "short";
when that happens, add to the mixture, up to 7% bentonite. If
clay is too plastic, add "grog." . . .
Shrinkage may be decreased by adding flint or grog to the clay.
Grog is clay that has been biscuit-fired and then crushed. Some
people prepare their own grog from broken biscuit-fired pieces. It
can be bought at very little cost at any supply company in varying
degrees of fineness. The coarser the particles of grog added to the
clay, the coarser the texture of the fired object will be.
Grog makes clay porous and is used for objects which are not
intended to hold water. Grog also prevents warpage and is, there-
fore, very useful for tile making and for sculpture. 20% is a good
proportion of grog in a clay mixture.
(Muriel Pargh Turoff, Hoia to Make Pottery and Other Ceramic
Ware, New York: Crown Publishers, 1949, p. 13.)
Once you have the clay, you can make the tiles.
In this method of tile making, a wooden form is used that has
the dimensions desired for the finished tiles. It is put together by
1142
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

248 
SOFT TILE AND BRICK
nailing four strips of wood to a smooth piece of board. The strips
should be i inch wide and their height may vary from ^ inch to
24 inch, depending on how thick you wish the finished tiles to be.
It is a good plan to put a piece of oilcloth on the base board before
nailing down the strips. This will keep the board from warping. . . .
Roll out a slab of clay. . . . Then cut from the slab a piece that
will fit comfortably into the form and roll it down with a rolling
pin. Do not roll the pin all the way across the surface of the clay,
but work from the center outwards to all four sides. . . . Let the
tile dry until it is leather-hard; then separate it from the form by
running a knife around its edges. . . .
Clay tiles should be allowed to dry very slowly, and for this
reason should be put in a cool place. If they dry too quickly under
heat, they are apt to crack or warp. The edges have a tendency to
dry more rapidly than the center and usually should be dampened
from time to time to prevent this. (Joseph Learning, Fun With Clay,
Philadelphia and New York: J. B. Lippincott Company.)
To fire soft tiles and bricks, it is not necessary to build real
kilns. They can be fired in open pits much like those which
primitive potters used to fire their pottery. This type of open
pit firing is described in detail by Daniel Rhodes, in Kilns:
Design, Construction and Operation, Philadelphia: Chilton Book
Company. Briefly:
Dig a shallow pit about 14 to zo inches deep, and several square
feet in area. Line this pit (bottom and sides) with branches, reeds,
twigs, etc. Place the tiles and bricks to be fired on the lining, so that
they are compactly piled with just a tiny bit of airspace between
them—(they can be criss-crossed). . . . If you use old tiles to
line the pit, it will keep the heat in even better; and air holes low
down at one end will help combustion. . . . Put some fuel in
between stacks and over them. Then light the fuel in the pit, and
allow it to burn slowly—which it will to begin with because not
much air can get to it. Pile more fuel on as the fire burns up to a
level above the pit. After the entire pit and its contents reach red
heat, allow the fire to die down, and cover the top of the fire with
wet leaves, dung or ashes to retain the heat. After the fire has
died down, and the embers cooled, the tiles can be removed.
"43
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
Therefore:
Use bricks and tiles which are soft baked, low fired—so
that they will wear with time, and show the marks of use.
You can make them in a simple mold from local clay,
right on the site; surround the stack with twigs and fire-
wood; and fire them, to a soft pink color which will leave
them soft enough to wear with time.
The soft pink color helps to create WARM COLORS (250). Be-
fore firing, you may want to give the tiles some ORNAMENT
(249). . . .
1144
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

complete the building with ornament and, light and
color arid your own things.
249. 
ORNAMENT
250. WARM COLORS
251. DIFFERENT CHAIRS
252. 
POOLS OF LIGHT
253. 
THINGS FROM YOUR LIFE
1145
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

249 ORNAMENT**
1146
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . once buildings and gardens are finished; walls, columns,
windows, doors, and surfaces are in place; boundaries and edges
and transitions are defined—MAIN ENTRANCE (no), BUILDING
EDGE (l6o), CONNECTION TO THE EARTH (l68), GARDEN WALL
(173), WINDOW PLACE (l8o), CORNER DOORS (196), FRAMES AS
THICKENED EDGES (225), COLUMN PLACE (226), COLUMN
CONNECTION (227), ROOF CAPS (232), SOFT INSIDE WALLS (235),
SITTING WALL (243), and so on—it is time to put in the finishing
touches, to fill the gaps, to mark the boundaries, by making
ornament.
All people have the instinct to decorate their surround-
ings.
But decorations and ornaments will only work when they are
properly made: for ornaments and decorations are not only born
from the natural exuberance and love for something happy in a
building; they also have a function, which is as clear, and definite
as any other function in a building. The joy and exuberance of
carvings and color will only work, if they are made in harmony
with this function. And, further, the function is a necessary one
—the ornaments are not just optional additions which may, or
may not be added to a building, according as the spirit moves
you—a building needs them, just as much as it needs doors and
windows.
In order to understand the function of ornament, we must be-
gin by understanding the nature of space in general. Space,
when properly formed, is whole. Every part of it, every part of a
town, a neighborhood, a building, a garden, or a room, is whole,
in the sense that it is both an integral entity, in itself, and at
the same time, joined to some other entities to form a larger
whole. This process hinges largely on the boundaries. It is no
accident that so many of the patterns in this pattern language
concern the importance of the boundaries between things, as
places that are as important as the things themselves—for ex-
1147
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
ample, SUBCULTURE BOUNDARY (13), NEIGHBORHOOD BOUNDARY
(15), ARCADES ( l i g ) , BUILDING EDGE (l6o), GALLERY SUR-
ROUND (l66), CONNECTION TO THE EARTH (l68), HALF-OPEN
WALLS (l93), THICK WALLS (197)3 FRAMES AS THICKENED EDGES
(225), HALF-INCH TRIM (240), SITTING WALL (243).
A thing is whole only when it is itself entire and also joined
to its outside to form a larger entity. But this can only
happen when the boundary between the two is so thick, so fleshy,
so ambiguous, that the two are not sharply separated, but can
function either as separate entities or as one larger whole which
has no inner cleavage in it.
Split . . . and whole.
In the left-hand diagram where there is a cleavage that is
sharp, the thing and its outside are distinct entities—they func-
tion individually as wholes—but they do not function together as
a larger whole. In this case the world is split. In the right-hand
diagram where there is ambiguous space between them, the
two entities are individually entire, as before, but they are also
entire together as a larger whole. In this case the world is
whole.
This principle extends throughout the material universe, from
the largest organic structures in our surroundings, to the very
atoms and molecules.
Extreme examples of this principle at work in manmade
objects are in the endless surfaces of objects from the so-called
"dark ages" and in the carpets and tilework of Turkey and
Persia. Leaving aside the profound meaning of these "orna-
ments," it is a fact that they function mainly by creating surfaces
in which each part is simultaneously figure and boundary and
in which the design acts as boundary and figure at several differ-
ent levels simultaneously.
1148
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

249 ORNAMENT
A decoration which is whole, because it cannot
be broken into -parts.
Since none of the parts can be separated from their surround-
ings, because each part acts as figure and as boundary, at several
levels, this ancient carpet is whole, to an extraordinary degree.
The main purpose of ornament in the environment—in build-
ings, rooms, and public spaces—is to make the world more whole
by knitting it together in -precisely the same way this carpet
does it.
If the patterns in this language are used correctly, then these
unifying boundaries will already come into existence without
ornament at almost all the scales where they are necessary in
spaces and materials. It will happen in the large spaces, like the
entrance transition or the building edge. And, of course, it hap-
pens of its own accord, in those smaller structures which occur
within the materials themselves—in the fibers of wood, in the
grain of brick and stone. But there is an intermediate range of
scales, a twilight zone, where it will not happen of its own accord.
// is in this range of scales that ornament fills the gap.
As far as specific ways of doing it are concerned, there are
hundreds, of course. In this balustrade the ornament is made
entirely of the boundary, of the space between the boards. The
boards are cut in such a way, that when they are joined to-
gether in the fence, they make something of the space between
them.
"49
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
. . . A balustrade.
Here is a more complicated case—the entrance to a Romanesque
church.
A doorway.
The ornament is built up around the edge of the entrance. It
creates a unifying seam between the entrance sface and the
stone. Without the ornament, there would be a gap between the
arch of the entry and the passage itself: the ornament works on the
seam, between the two, and holds them together. It is especially
lavish and developed in this place, because just this seam—the
boundary of the entrance to the church—is so important, sym-
bolically, to the people who worship there.
In fact, doors and windows are always important for ornament,
because they are places of connection between the elements of
buildings and the life in and around them. It is very likely that
we shall find a concentration of ornament at the edges of doors
and windows, as people try to tie together these edges with the
space around them.
1150
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

249 ORNAMENT
Nubian door.
And exactly the same happens at hundreds of other places in
the environment; in rooms, around our houses, in the kitchen, on
a wall, along the surface of a path, on tops of roofs, around a
column—in fact, anywhere at all where there are edges between
things which are imperfectly knit together, where materials or
objects meet, and where they change.
Early American stencilling.
Most generally of all, the thing that makes the difference in
the use of ornament is the eye for the significant gap in the con-
tinuum: the place where the continuous fabric of interlock and
connectivity is broken. When ornament is applied badly it is
always put into some place where these connections are not really
missing, so it is superfluous, frivolous. When it is well used, it is
always applied in a place where there is a genuine gap, a need
for a little more structure, a need for what we may call meta-
phorically "some extra binding energy," to knit the stuff together
where it is too much apart.
Therefore:
Search around the building, and find those edges and
transitions which need emphasis or extra binding energy.
1151
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
Corners, places where materials meet, door frames, win-
dows, main entrances, the place where one wall meets an-
other, the garden gate, a fence—all these are natural places
which call out for ornament.
Now find simple themes and apply the elements of the
theme over and again to the edges and boundaries which
you decide to mark. Make the ornaments work as seams
along the boundaries and edges so that they knit the two
sides together and make them one.
Whenever it is possible, make the ornament while you are
building—not after—from the planks and boards and tiles and
surfaces of which the building is actually made—WALL MEM-
BRANE (2l8), FRAMES AS THICKENED EDGES (225), LAPPED
OUTSIDE WALLS (234), SOFT INSIDE WALLS (235), SOFT TILE AND
BRICK (248). Use color for ornament—WARM COLORS (250) ; use
the smaller trims which cover joints as ornament—HALF-INCH
TRIM (240) ; and embellish the rooms themselves with parts of
your life which become the natural ornaments around you—
THINGS FROM YOUR LIFE (253). . . .
1152
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

25O WARM COLORS**
. . . this pattern helps to create and generate the right kind
of GOOD MATERIALS (207), FLOOR SURFACE (233), SOFT INSIDE
WALLS (235). Where possible leave the materials in their natural
state. Just add enough color for decoration, and to make the
light inside alive and warm.
The greens and greys of hospitals and office corridors
are depressing and cold. Natural wood, sunlight, bright
colors are warm. In some way, the warmth of the colors in
a room makes a great deal of difference between comfort
and discomfort.
But just what are warm colors and cold colors? In a very
simple minded sense, red and yellow and orange and brown are
warm; blue and green and grey are cold. But, obviously, it is not
true that rooms with red and yellow feel good; while rooms
with blue and grey feel cold. There is some superficial truth to
this simple statement: it is true that reds and browns and
yellows helf to make rooms comfortable; but it is also true that
white and blue and green can all make people comfortable too.
After all, the sky is blue, and grass is green. Obviously, we feel
comfortable out in the green grass of a meadow, under the blue
sky.
The explanation is simple and fascinating. It is not the color of
the things, the surfaces, which make a place warm or cold, but
the color of the light. What exactly does this mean? We can
estimate the color of the light at a particular point in space by
holding a perfectly white surface there. If the light is warm, this
surface will be slightly tinted toward the yellow-red. If the light
is cold, this surface will be slightly tinted toward the blue-green.
This tinting will be very slight: indeed, on a small white surface
it may be so hard to see that you need a spectrometer to do it.
"53
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
But when you realize that everything in that space is lightly
tinted—people's faces, hands, shirts, dresses, food, paper, every-
thing—it is not so hard to see that this can have a huge effect on
the emotional quality that people experience there.
Now, the color of the light in a space does not depend in any
simple way on the color of the surface. It depends on a com-
plex interaction between the color of the light sources and the
way this light then bounces on and off the many surfaces. In a
meadow, on a spring day, the sunlight bouncing off the green
grass is still warm light—that is, in the yellowish reddish range.
The light in a hospital corridor, lit by fluorescent tubes, bouncing
off green walls is cold light—in the green-blue range. In a
room with lots of natural light, the overall light is warm. In a
room whose windows face onto a grey building across the street,
the light may be cold, unless there is a very strong concentration
of yellow and red fabrics.
If you are in any doubt about the objective character of the
light in the room and you don't have a spectrometer, all you need
to do is to try to use color film. If the light is warm and the film
is properly exposed, white walls will come out slightly pink. If the
light is cold, white walls will come out slightly blue.
So, in order to make a room comfortable, you must use a
collection of colors which together with the sources of light and
the reflecting surfaces outside the room, combine to make the
reflected light which exists in the middle of the room warm,
that is, toward the yellow-red. Yellow and red colors will always
do it. Blues and greens and whites will only do it in the proper
places, balanced with other colors, and when the light sources are
helping.
To complete the discussion we now make the concept of warm
light precise in terms of chromaticity. Consider the light falling on
any given surface in the middle of the room. This light contains a
variety of different wavelengths. Its character is specified, exactly,
by some distribution of spectral energies p(A), which gives the
relative proportions of different wavelengths present in this light.
We know that any light whatsoever—in short, any p(A)—can
be plotted as a single point on the color triangle—more formally
known as the two-dimensional chromaticity diagram—by means of
the standard color matching functions given in Gunter Wyszecki
1154
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

25O 
WARM COLORS
and W. S. Stiles, Color Science, New York, 1967, pp. 228-317.
The coordinates of a plot in this color triangle define the chroma-
ticity of any given energy distribution.
Chromaticity diagram.
We may now identify a region on the chromaticity diagram
which we shall call the warm region. It is shown hatched on the
drawing.
This hatched area is based on a number of empirical results.
For example, we know that people have a clear subjective im-
pression of the relative warmth, or coldness, of different spaces.
See, for instance, Committee on Colorimetry of the Optical So-
ciety of America, The Science of Color, New York, 1953, p. 168.
One study which attempts to identify the objective correlates of
perceived "warmth" is S. M. Newhall, "Warmth and Coolness of
Colors," Psychological Record, 4, 1941, pp. 198-212. This study
revealed a maximum for "warmest" judgments at dominant
wave-length 610 millimicrons, which is in the middle of the
orange range. And individual observer stability in such judgments
is high. Thus, one study gives reliability coefficients of 0.95 for
warmth and 0.82 for coolness—N. Collins, "The 
Appropriateness
of Certain Color Combinations in Advertising," M. A. thesis, Co-
lumbia University, New York, 1924.
Finally, it is vital to remember that this pattern requires only
that the light—the total light in the middle of a room, coming
from sunlight, artificial lights, reflections from walls, reflections
from outside, from carpets—the total light, lies in that part of the
color triangle we call "warm." It does not require that any in-
dividual color surfaces in the room should be red or orange or
"55
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
yellow—only that the combined effect of all the surfaces and
lights together, creates light in the middle of the room which lies
in the warm part of the color triangle.
Therefore:
Choose surface colors which, together with the color of
the natural light, reflected light, and artificial lights, create
a warm light in the rooms.
This means that yellows, reds, and oranges will often be
needed to pick out trim and lampshades and occasional details—
HALF-INCH TRIM (240), ORNAMENT (249), POOLS OF LIGHT
(252). Colored CANVAS ROOFS (244) and SOFT TILE AND BRICK
(248) also help to make warm colored light. Blues and greens
and greys are much harder to use; especially on the north side
where the light is cold and grey, but they can always be used for
ornament, where they help to set off the warmer colors—ORNA-
MENT (249)- • • •
1156
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

251 DIFFERENT CHAIRS
1157
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . when you are ready to furnish rooms, choose the variety of
furniture as carefully as you have made the building, so that each
piece of furniture, loose or built in, has the same unique and
organic individuality as the rooms and alcoves have—each
different, according to the place it occupies—SEQUENCE OF
SITTING SPACES (142), SITTING CIRCLE (185), BUILT-IN SEATS
(202).
People are different sizes; they sit in different ways.
And yet there is a tendency in modern times to make all
chairs alike.
Of course, this tendency to make all chairs alike is fueled by
the demands of prefabrication and the supposed economies of
scale. Designers have for years been creating "perfect chairs"—
chairs that can be manufactured cheaply in mass. These chairs are
made to be comfortable for the average person. And the institu-
tions that buy chairs have been persuaded that buying these
chairs in bulk meets all their needs.
But what it means is that some people are chronically uncom-
fortable; and the variety of moods among people sitting gets en-
tirely stifled.
Obviously, the "average chair" is good for some, but not for
everyone. Short and tall people are likely to be uncomfortable.
And although situations are roughly uniform—in a restaurant
everyone is eating, in an office everyone is working at a table—
even so, there are important distinctions: people sitting for dif-
ferent lengths of time; people sitting back and musing; people
sitting aggressively forward in a hot discussion; people sitting
formally, waiting for a few minutes. If the chairs are all the same,
these differences are repressed, and some people are uncomfort-
able.
What is less obvious, and yet perhaps most important of all,
is this: we project our moods and personalities into the chairs
we sit in. In one mood a big fat chair is just right; in another
1158
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

251 
DIFFERENT CHAIRS
mood, a rocking chair; for another, a stiff upright; and yet again,
a stool or sofa. And, of course, it isn't only that we like to switch
according to our mood; one of them is our favorite chair, the one
that makes us most secure and comfortable; and that again is dif-
ferent for each person. A setting that is full of chairs, all slightly
different, immediately creates an amosphere which supports rich
experience; a setting which contains chairs that are all alike puts
a subtle straight jacket on experience.
Therefore:
Never furnish any place with chairs that are identically
the same. Choose a variety of different chairs, some big,
some small, some softer than others, some rockers, some
very old, some new, with arms, without arms, some wicker,
some wood, some cloth.
Where chairs are placed alone and where chairs are gathered,
reinforce the character of the places which the chairs create with
POOLS OF LIGHT (252), each local to the group of chairs it
marks. ...
1159
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

252 POOLS OF LIGHT**
. . . this pattern helps to finish small social spaces like ALCOVES
(179) and WORKSPACE ENCLOSURE (183), larger places like
COMMON AREAS AT THE HEART (129), ENTRANCE ROOM (130),
and FLEXIBLE OFFICE SPACE (146), and the furnishing of rooms
like EATING ATMOSPHERE (182), SITTING CIRCLE (185), and
DIFFERENT CHAIRS (251). It even helps to generate WARM COLORS
(250).
Uniform illumination—the sweetheart of the lighting
engineers—serves no useful purpose whatsoever. In fact, it
destroys the social nature of space, and makes people feel
disoriented and unbounded.
Look at this picture. It is an egg-crate ceiling, with dozens of
evenly spaced fluorescent lights above it. It is meant to make the
light as flat and even as possible, in a mistaken effort to imitate
the sky.
Flat, even light.
But it is based on two mistakes. First of all, the light outdoors
is almost never even. Most natural places, and especially the
1160
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

252 
POOLS OF LIGHT
conditions under which the human organism evolved, have
dappled light which varies continuously from minute to minute,
and from place to place.
More serious, it is a fact of human nature that the space we
use as social space is in part denned by light. When the light is
perfectly even, the social function of the space gets utterly de-
stroyed: it even becomes difficult for people to form natural hu-
man groups. If a group is in an area of uniform illumination, there
are no light gradients corresponding to the boundary of the
group, so the definition, cohesiveness, and "existence" of the
group will be weakened. If the group is within a "pool" of light,
whose size and boundaries correspond to those of the group, this
enchances the definition, cohesiveness, and even the phenome-
nological existence of the groups
One possible explanation is suggested by the experiments of
Hopkinson and Longmore, who showed that small bright light
sources distract the attention less than large areas which are less
bright. These authors conclude that local lighting over a work
table allows the worker to pay more attention to his work than
uniform background lighting does. It seems reasonable to infer that
the high degree of person to person attention required to main-
tain the cohesiveness of a social group is more likely to be sustained
if the group has local lighting, than if it has uniform background
lighting. (See R. G. Hopkinson and J. Longmore, "Attention
and Distraction in the Lighting of Workplaces," Ergonomics, 2,
1959, p. 321 ff. Also reprinted in R. G. Hopkinson, Lighting,
London: HMSO, 1963, pp. 261-68.)
On-the-spot observation supports this conjecture. At the In-
ternational House, University of California, Berkeley, there is a
large room which is a general waiting and sitting lounge for guests
and residents. There are 4.2 seats in the room, 12 of them are next
to lamps. At the two times of observation we counted a total of 21
people sitting in the room; 13 of them chose to sit next to
lamps. These figures show that people prefer sitting near
lights (X2n=n.4, significant at the o.l% level). Yet the
overall light level in the room was high enough for reading. We
conclude that people do seek "pools of light."
Everyday experience bears out the same observation in
hundreds of cases. Every good restaurant keeps each table as a
1161
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
separate pool of light, knowing that this contributes to its privai
and intimate ambience. In a house a truly comfortable old chaii
"yours," has its own light in dimmer surroundings—so tha
you retreat from the bustle of the family to read the paper ir
peace. Again, house dining tables often have a single lamp sus-
pended over the table—the light seems almost to act like glue for
all the people sitting round the table. In larger situations the
same thing seems to be true. Think of the park bench, under a
solitary light, and the privacy of the world which it creates for
a pair of lovers. Or, in a trucking depot, the solidarity of the
group of men sipping coffee around a brightly lit coffee stand.
One word of caution. This pattern is easy to understand; and
perhaps it is easy to agree with. But it is quite a subtle matter to
actually create functioning pools of light in the environment. We
know of many failures: for example, places where small lights do
break down even illumination, but do not correspond in any real
way with the places where people tend to gather in the space.
Light fools at odds with social space.
Therefore:
Place the lights low, and apart, to form individual pools
of light which encompass chairs and tables like bubbles to
reinforce the social character of the spaces which they form.
Remember that you can't have pools of light without the
darker places in between.
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

252 
POOLS OF LIGHT
Color the lampshades and the hangings near the lights to make
the light which bounces off them warm in color—WARM COLORS
(250). . . .
1163
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

253 THINGS FROM
YOUR LIFE*
1164
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

. . . lastly, when you have taken care of everything, and you
start living in the places you have made, you may wonder what
kinds of things to pin up on the walls.
"Decor" and the conception of "interior design" have
spread so widely, that very often people forget their instinct
for the things they really want to keep around them.
There are two ways of looking at this simple fact. We may
look at it from the point of view of the person who owns the
space, and from the point of view of the people who come to it.
From the owner's point of view, it is obvious that the things
around you should be the things which mean most to you, which
have the power to play a part in the continuous process of self-
transformation, which is your life. That much is clear.
But this function has been eroded, gradually, in modern times
because people have begun to look outward, to others, and over
their shoulders, at the people who are corning to visit them, and
have replaced their natural instinctive decorations with the things
which they believe will please and impress their visitors. This
is the motive behind all the interior design and decor in the
women's magazines. And designers play on these anxieties by
making total designs, telling people they have no right to move
anything, paint the walls, or add a plant, because they are not
party to the mysteries of Good Design.
But the irony is, that the visitors who come into a room don't
want this nonsense any more than the people who live there. It
is far more fascinating to come into a room which is the living
expression of a person, or a group of people, so that you can see
their lives, their histories, their inclinations, displayed in manifest
form around the walls, in the furniture, on the shelves. Beside
such experience—and it is as ordinary as the grass—the artificial
scene-making of "modern decor" is totally bankrupt.
Jung describes the room that was his study, how he filled the
stone walls with paintings that he made each day directly on
1165
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.

CONSTRUCTION
the stones—mandalas, dream images, preoccupations—and he
tells us that the room came gradually to be a living thing to
him—the outward counterpart to his unconscious.
Examples we know: A motel run by a Frenchman, mementos
of the Resistance all around the lounge, the letter from Charles
de Gaulle. An outdoor market on the highway, where the
proprietor has mounted his collection of old bottles all over the
walls; hundreds of bottles, all shapes and colors; some of them
are down for cleaning; there is an especially beautiful one up at
the counter by the cash register. An anarchist runs the hot dog
stand, he plasters the walls with literature, proclamations, mani-
festoes against the State.
A hunting glove, a blind man's cane, the collar of a favorite
dog, a panel of pressed flowers from the time when we were
children, oval pictures of grandma, a candlestick, the dust from a
volcano carefully kept in a bottle, a picture from the news of
prison convicts at Attica in charge of the prison, not knowing
that they were about to die, an old photo, the wind blowing in
the grass and a church steeple in the distance, spiked sea shells
with the hum of the sea still in them.
Therefore:
Do not be tricked into believing that modern decor must
be slick or psychedelic, or "natural" or "modern art," or
"plants" or anything else that current taste-makers claim.
It is most beautiful when it comes straight from your life
—the things you care for, the things that tell your story.
1166
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language : Towns, Buildings, Construction, Oxford
         University Press, Incorporated, 1977. ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/ucl/detail.action?
Created from ucl on 2025-02-14 07:47:07.
Copyright © 1977. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.