How Does Global–Local Identity Affect
Consumer Preference for Access-Based
Consumption? Investigating the Mediating
Role of Consumption Openness
Xiaodong Nie, Zhiyong Yang, Yinlong Zhang, and Narayan Janakiraman
Abstract
Given the increasing importance of the global sharing economy, consumers face the decision of whether to choose an access-
based option versus an owned option. However, understanding of how consumers’ global–local identity may inﬂuence their pref-
erence for access-based consumption is rather limited. The authors ﬁll this knowledge gap by proposing that consumers high in
global identity (“globals”) have a greater preference for access-based consumption than those high in local identity (“locals”). Such
effects are mediated by consumers’ consumption openness. Consistent with the “consumption openness” account, the authors
ﬁnd that when the desire for openness is enhanced by a contextual cue, locals’ preference for access-based consumption is
elevated, whereas globals’ preference for access-based consumption is unaffected. However, when the desire for openness is sup-
pressed by a contextual cue, globals’ preference for access-based consumption is reduced, whereas locals’ preference for access-
based consumption is unaffected. Similarly, consumers’ traveler–settler orientation sets a boundary for the relationship between
global–local identity and preference for access-based consumption, given its close association with consumption openness.
Theoretical and managerial implications are discussed.
Keywords
sharing economy, preference for access-based consumption, global–local identity, consumption openness, traveler–settler
orientation
Online supplement: https://doi.org/10.1177/00222437211055130
The global sharing economy is expected to grow from $14
billion in 2014 to $335 billion by 2025 (Osztovits et al.
2015). Consumer preference for access-based consumption
plays a signiﬁcant role in this new trend. In this research,
access-based consumption is deﬁned as the consumption
mode that is market mediated and does not involve the transfer
of ownership of the product (Bardhi and Eckhardt 2012).
Access-based consumption varies in the degree of sharing attri-
butes and commodity exchange attributes. For example,
BlaBlaCar and Uber entail more sharing attributes because
their supply is crowdsourced from many individual consumers
and relies on the relationships between resource providers and
consumers (Belk 2010; Eckhardt et al. 2019). Consumers in
such access-based systems expect to have some degree of
social interaction with others (Habibi, Kim, and Laroche
2016). In contrast, Zipcar and other short-term car rental ser-
vices involve more commodity exchange attributes that focus
on ﬁnancial transactions without much social interaction
(Belk 2010; Eckhardt et al. 2019). Despite this difference, a
common property associated with these access-based systems
is that they provide individuals with ﬂexibility and access to a
product’s beneﬁts for a limited period of time without requiring
consumers to own the product (Lamberton and Rose 2012).
Consumers increasingly must choose between an access-
based option for a limited period (e.g., renting the product) or
a
permanent
ownership–based
option
(e.g.,
buying
the
product). For example, a person searching for a bicycle could
use an access-based program to rent one for about $2.50 per
Xiaodong Nie is Assistant Professor of Marketing, School of Business, University
of Washington Bothell, USA (email: xnie@uw.edu). Zhiyong Yang is Professor of
Marketing and Head, Bryan School of Business and Economics, University of
North Carolina at Greensboro, USA (email: z_yang4@uncg.edu). Yinlong
Zhang is Tom C. Frost Endowed Professor in International Business and
Professor of Marketing, Carlos Alvarez College of Business, University of
Texas
at
San
Antonio,
USA
(email:
yinlong.zhang@utsa.edu).
Narayan
Janakiraman is Associate Professor of Marketing, College of Business,
University of Texas at Arlington, USA (email: janakira@uta.edu).
Article
Journal of Marketing Research
2022, Vol. 59(3) 555-577
© American Marketing Association 2022
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/00222437211055130
journals.sagepub.com/home/mrj

trip (e.g., BLUEbikes), or they could purchase one for about
$400. Such options for the same product appear not only
among transportation products but also in a wide array of
other product categories, including clothing (e.g., Rent the
Runway) and entertainment equipment (e.g., REI).
Given the importance of the global sharing economy, prior
researchers have identiﬁed factors that may impact consumers’
preference for access-based consumption (e.g., Bardhi and
Eckhardt 2012; Eckhardt et al. 2019; for a summary, see
Appendix A). For example, drawing on a beneﬁt–cost frame-
work, some researchers found that ﬁnancial beneﬁts (Bardhi
and Eckhardt 2012), convenience beneﬁts (Moeller and
Wittkowski 2010), utility beneﬁts (Habibi, Kim, and Laroche
2016), and social beneﬁts (Edbring, Lehner, and Mont 2016)
enhance, but search costs and technical costs (Habibi, Kim,
and Laroche 2016; Lamberton and Rose 2012) inhibit, consum-
ers’ preference for access-based consumption. Going beyond
beneﬁt–cost factors, other scholars examined how consumers’
experiences and perceptions may affect their preference for
access-based consumption, showing that consumers are more
willing to use access-based products or programs when they
perceive fewer barriers (e.g., contamination; Hazée, Delcourt,
and Van Vaerenbergh 2017), when the risk of product scarcity
is low (Lamberton and Rose 2012), and when they have greater
knowledge of access-based consumption (Lamberton and Rose
2012). Still others examined how personal characteristics may
affect preference for access-based consumption, such as intelli-
gence scores (Aspara and Wittkowski 2019), degree of materi-
alism (Davidson, Habibi, and Laroche 2018), and sense of
power (Liu and Mattila 2017). Closely related to this research,
scholars have found that consumers tend to prefer access-based
options when a product is less “me” and more substitutable
(Weiss 2017). In a broader sense, this echoes Eckhardt et al.’s
(2019) suggestion that a consumer’s identity plays an important
role
in
inﬂuencing
their
preference
for
access-based
consumption.
These studies provide intriguing ﬁndings. However, extant
literature has largely ignored the close connection between
globalization and access-based consumption as well as the
important role of global–local identity in inﬂuencing consum-
ers’ preference to use access-based products and programs.
Globalization
has
exacerbated
the
birth
of
the
sharing
economy on a global scale, and it has made global–local iden-
tity
essential
in
understanding consumer
decisions.
For
example, an emerging stream of literature has uncovered the
effects of global–local identity on various consumer responses,
including price sensitivity (Gao, Mittal, and Zhang 2020; Gao,
Zhang, and Mittal 2017), preference for local/global products
and brands (Ng, Faraji-Rad, and Batra 2021; Zhang and
Khare 2009), preference for ecofriendly products (Ng and
Basu 2019), and a tendency to use price as a signal of
product quality (Yang et al. 2019). Extending the literature,
we examine the role of global–local identity in consumers’ pref-
erence for access-based consumption and the mechanism
underlying these effects. We demonstrate that consumers high
in global identity have a greater preference for access-based
consumption than those high in local identity, because globals
are high in consumption openness. In this research, we deﬁne
“consumption openness” as the extent to which individuals
desire a wide range of different and diverse products or
choice options. Consistent with the “consumption openness”
account, we further ﬁnd that contextual factors affecting con-
sumption openness (e.g., desire for openness, traveler–settler
orientation) moderate the effect of global–local identity on con-
sumers’ preference for access-based consumption.
Our research makes signiﬁcant contributions to the sharing
economy and consumer identity literature streams. First, we
advance the sharing economy literature by showing the impor-
tant but largely ignored role of consumer identity: our research
represents a ﬁrst attempt to uncover consumers’ global–local
identity as a new antecedent of access-based consumption.
Such an examination brings a fresh perspective to the sharing
economy literature and extends our understanding of how glob-
alization may affect consumer attitudes toward access-based
consumption. Second, we uncover the critical role of consumption
openness in explaining consumers’ preference for access-based
consumption while ruling out several alternative explanations.
Third, consistent with the consumption openness logic, we identify
contextual factors that set boundary conditions for the impact of
global–local identity on consumers’ preference for access-based
consumption. Managerially, our ﬁndings suggest that marketers
of access-based systems can use contextual cues (e.g., ads that
embed multicultural features) to activate consumers’ global iden-
tity to enhance their acceptance of access-based options.
Furthermore, in line with the consumption openness account, mar-
keters of access-based systems can use communication appeals to
activate consumers’ desire for openness to facilitate their prefer-
ence for these offerings. Our ﬁndings also suggest that when mar-
keters expand to global markets, they do not need to allocate much
budget to educate consumers about the beneﬁt of access-based
consumption in countries that are high in global identity.
However, when marketers enter countries that are high in local
identity, they may need to make additional efforts to activate con-
sumers’ consumption openness to enhance their acceptance for
access-based options.
Global–Local Identity and Preference
for Access-Based Consumption
Researchers have developed the construct of global–local iden-
tity to study consumers’ responses to the marketing conse-
quences of globalization. Globals have a salient global
identity, favor globalization, view the world as a global
village, and identify with people around the world. In contrast,
locals have a salient local identity, favor local traditions, have
strong interests in local events, and identify with people in
their local community (Arnett 2002). In addition, globals
prefer global products and brands, whereas locals prefer local
products and brands (Ng, Faraji-Rad, and Batra 2021; Tu,
Khare, and Zhang 2012; Zhang and Khare 2009). When con-
sumers’ local identity is salient, they tend to be less price
556
Journal of Marketing Research 59(3)

sensitive (Gao, Mittal, and Zhang 2020; Gao, Zhang, and Mittal
2017) and more likely to use a product’s price to judge its
quality (Yang et al. 2019).
Global identity and local identity have been shown to be dis-
tinct constructs (Tu, Khare, and Zhang 2012). Consumers can
simultaneously possess both global and local identities (Arnett
2002; Ng and Batra 2017); however, one identity may be more
salient and therefore more inﬂuential in guiding behavior, depend-
ing on idiosyncratic or situational factors (Ng, Faraji-Rad, and
Batra 2021; Yang et al. 2019). This is in line with the research
on social identities, which shows that although individuals may
possess multiple identities simultaneously, the relative strength
of each identity compared with the others at any given moment
impacts an individual’s behavior (Brewer 1991).
Three operationalizations of global–local identity have been
practiced. First, the KOF Index of Globalization—a country-
level measure—has been used to explain consumption behav-
iors across different countries. Treating this country-level
index as a proxy of individuals’ global–local identity is consis-
tent with recent literature showing that individuals from more
globalized countries, such as Vietnamese living in the United
States, are more likely to have a stronger global identity due
to greater exposure to different cultures and global business;
however, Vietnamese living in more localized countries (e.g.,
Vietnam) tend to have a stronger local identity due to their
restricted access to other cultures (Gao, Mittal, and Zhang
2020; Gao, Zhang, and Mittal 2017; Ng and Basu 2019; Ng,
Faraji-Rad, and Batra 2021; Yang et al. 2019). The use of the
internet as a new information source does not seem to change
much of consumers’ global–local identity. For example, 61%
of Indians (who are high in local identity) versus only 25% of
Dutch (who are high in global identity) follow local news and
stories very closely; however, 82% of Dutch versus only 53%
of Indians follow global news and stories closely (Mitchell
et al. 2018), indicating that local news and local stories still
account for the majority of locals’ internet viewing even
when using the internet as an information source (in addition
to traditional media such as TV, movies, and newspapers).
Second, previous studies have often assessed chronic
global–local identity using measurements. Researchers have
used both the bidimensional approach (i.e., measuring global–
identity and local–identity and then using them separately to
explain downstream variables; Gao, Zhang, and Mittal 2017)
and the unidimensional approach (i.e., subtracting global–iden-
tity scores from local–identity scores to obtain a relative identity
index; Ng, Faraji-Rad, and Batra 2021), yielding consistent
conclusions. According to Ng, Faraji-Rad, and Batra (2021),
focusing on individual identity separately may omit important
information about the strength of the other identity (e.g., a
person may be high in one identity but even higher in the
other), and thus the unidimensional approach is needed to
better interpret the observed ﬁndings.
Finally, global–local identity can be situationally activated
through priming tasks. Because it is conceptually difﬁcult to
prime participants to be high in both local and global identities,
or low in both local and global identities, a common practice in
this domain is to prime local identity and global identity sepa-
rately, then compare outcome variables across these two identi-
ties (Gao, Zhang, and Mittal 2017; Ng and Batra 2017; Ng,
Faraji-Rad, and Batra 2021; Tu, Khare, and Zhang 2012;
Yang et al. 2019; Zhang and Khare 2009). Following previous
research, we aim to compare preference for access-based con-
sumption across consumers high in global identity and those
high in local identity. Our expectation is that consumers high
in global (vs. local) identity have higher consumption openness,
which in turn leads to a greater preference for access-based con-
sumption. In the following subsections, we provide theoretical
justiﬁcations for our hypothesized effects.
Global–Local Identity and Consumption Openness
Drawing on the distinct characteristics associated with global–
local identity, we propose that a fundamental difference
between globals and locals rests in the strength of their desire
for openness. Globals are anticipated to exhibit a greater
desire for openness, which motivates them to associate more
values with diversiﬁed experiences, ideas, and values. In con-
trast, because locals discern greater differences between local
and nonlocal communities, they tend to have weaker desire
for openness and to be less open to diversiﬁed experiences,
ideas, and values. In line with this logic, previous research
has shown that globals are more accommodating to different
values (e.g., ethnicity, gender, religion, sexual orientation)
than locals (Rieﬂer, Diamantopoulos, and Siguaw 2012).
Globals view the world as a “global village.” They access
and receive information and ideas about other countries and cul-
tures, blur the lines between countries and cultures, and travel
outside their own country to meet different people with
greater ease (Ng and Basu 2019; Steenkamp and De Jong
2010). This is partly because globals tend to view the insights
obtained from foreign cultures as intellectual resources that
complement their heritage culture (Chiu et al. 2011); thus,
they are motivated to integrate diversiﬁed experiences and
values. In contrast, locals associate more values with local tra-
ditions and events, exhibit greater attachment to their local com-
munity, and prefer not to move out of their local community
(Arnett 2002). In line with our reasoning, prior studies show
that individuals with a salient global identity are more likely
to work for global organizations, work in multicultural teams,
speak multiple languages, and live in more than one country
than those with a salient local identity (Erez et al. 2013).
Other evidence also supports the conceptual link between
global
identity
and
desire
for
openness.
For
example,
Singaporeans (who are relatively high in global identity) are
more willing to draw on experiences and ideas from other cul-
tures and to use these ideas to generate new solutions to a
problem. Conversely, mainland Chinese (who are relatively
high in local identity) tend to quarantine and isolate the
erosive effects of other cultures to prevent these effects from
spreading to their lives (Chiu et al. 2011). One study also
showed that students who took cultural psychology classes
and got exposed to different cultures and values (and thus had
Nie et al.
557

a salient global identity) were more open-minded than those
who did not (Buchtel 2014). Similarly, priming individuals
with diversiﬁed cultural elements (and thus a salient global
identity) enhances their receptiveness to ideas and values differ-
ent from their own, compared with individuals who are primed
with only their own cultural elements (and thus a salient local
identity; Leung and Chiu 2010). In addition, priming people
to think of engaging with a global community (and thus a
salient global identity) prompts them to meet new people and
makes them more motivated to expand their social networks.
Meanwhile, priming people to think of engaging with their
local community (and thus a salient local identity) binds them
more closely to their surrounding environment, and they
become less motivated to expand their social networks to
make new friends (Oishi et al. 2013).
In the context of consumption-related decisions, we propose
that globals’ desire for openness will lead them to have higher
consumption openness and seek out a wide range of products
and choice options. The heightened consumption openness, in
turn, affects their product adoption decisions. For example, con-
sumers who receive more international exposure (and thus are
higher in global identity) tend to react more positively and have
a greater willingness to try different products and ideas without
prejudice (Nijssen and Douglas 2011). Furthermore, Americans
(who are high in global identity) are more amenable to use differ-
ent rules to select products and tend to change the rules quickly in
different environments, whereas Koreans (who are high in local
identity) tend to stay with a consistent rule for product selection;
thus, they are less open to make a change (Kim and Drolet 2003).
When evaluating various brands of the same product in the mar-
ketplace, globals (vs. locals) exhibit more accommodation by
focusing on the common attributes among these brands (Yang
et al. 2019). Next, we discuss how the differences in consumption
openness between globals and locals may inﬂuence their prefer-
ence for access-based consumption.
Global–Local Identity, Consumption Openness,
and Preference for Access-Based Consumption
As shown in Figure 1, our focal hypothesis that consumption
openness mediates the effect of global–local identity on prefer-
ence for access-based consumption relies on the proposed link
between consumption openness and preference for access-
based consumption. Several lines of literature support this link.
First, engaging in access-based consumption ﬁts well with
consumers’ consumption openness, as it allows them to have
different
consumption
experiences.
Access-based
options
provide a different consumption experience for people to
obtain products and services (Bardhi and Eckhardt 2012). It sat-
isﬁes consumers’ willingness to embrace ideas, change present
lifestyles, and take risks—the qualities closely related to
whether, and to what degree, they are open to the changes intro-
duced by market offerings. In fact, the access-based services
have expanded consumers’ roles on both the “demand side”
and the “supply side” (Ritzer and Jurgenson 2010), enabling
consumers to take on institutional roles that are typically con-
ducted by ﬁrms in the traditional economy. For example,
Zipcar requires members not only to return the car on time
but also to clean and prepare it for the next user. As such, con-
sumers take on a variety of different responsibilities, including
communication (e.g., coordinating with the service provider or
the user), promotion (e.g., providing ratings and reviews), and
quality control (e.g., taking care of the product for the next
user), as compared with the traditional means of consumption
(Eckhardt et al. 2019). This suggests that consumers who can
easily adapt to the roles and are open to taking on additional
responsibilities should have a greater preference for access-
based items, as they are more comfortable engaging in such dif-
ferent roles from their traditional ones. Indeed, individuals who
enjoy different experiences, and are thus open to change, tend to
prefer access-based options rather than forming an enduring
attachment over time and space (Bardhi and Eckhardt 2012).
Second, consumers with greater consumption openness are
more likely to value the ﬂexibility embedded in access-based
systems, because access-based systems enable them to obtain
products and services based on their self-interests in what types
of products to obtain and when and where to obtain them.
According to Habibi, Kim, and Laroche (2016), a major driver
of using access-based systems is to access various options to
satisfy consumers’ ever-changing needs and purposes at any
time and place. In fact, the ﬂexibility associated with these access-
based systems emerges as a lifestyle facilitator, allowing consum-
ers to engage in a lifestyle they could not otherwise obtain through
traditional ownership, such as trying a wide range of models of
Figure 1. The impact of global–local identity on preference for access-based consumption.
558
Journal of Marketing Research 59(3)

products according to their lifestyle needs (Bardhi and Eckhardt
2012). In addition, consumers who enjoy traveling (and thus
have greater consumption openness) prefer to form open and tran-
sient relationships with their surrounding objects and are more
likely to engage in a ﬂexible lifestyle (Oishi 2010).
Finally, engaging in access-based consumption also suits
consumers’ consumption openness in that it satisﬁes their need
for a temporary use of the product. Temporality is an important
catalyst for access-based consumption, as it enables consumers
to obtain context-speciﬁc values of a product (Bardhi and
Eckhardt 2017; Chen 2009). In fact, previous research shows
that consumers who enjoy traveling (and thus have a stronger
desire for openness) tend to appraise situational value to form
temporary relationships with products because products can
have a symbolic value in one place but lose their value in
another place (Bardhi, Eckhardt, and Arnould 2012). Taken
together, we hypothesize:
H1: Consumers with a global identity have a greater pref-
erence for access-based consumption than those with a
local identity.
H2: The effect of global–local identity on preference for
access-based consumption is mediated by consumption
openness.
Boundary Conditions
To further test the mediating role of consumption openness, we
next investigate theoretically relevant boundary conditions. We
have argued that globals (vs. locals) are high in consumption
openness, which enhances their preference for access-based
consumption. Thus, when desire for openness is enhanced
through a contextual cue (compared with a control condition
wherein it is unchanged), locals—whose baseline consumption
openness is low and has a greater potential for increase—should
increase their consumption openness and exhibit a greater pref-
erence for access-based consumption. However, such a contex-
tual cue is less likely to increase globals’ preference for
access-based consumption, because their baseline consumption
openness is already high and has less potential for increase
(“ceiling effect”). In a similar vein, when a desire for openness
is contextually reduced (compared with a control condition
wherein it is unchanged), globals—who by nature are high in
consumption openness and have a greater potential for
decrease—should be less likely to be open to various product
adoption options and thus reduce their preference for access-
based consumption. However, such a contextual cue is less
likely to suppress the preference for access-based consumption
among locals, whose consumption openness is already low and
is difﬁcult to decrease further (“ﬂoor effect”). This is consistent
with the moderation-of-process logic (Spencer, Zanna, and
Fong 2005). We hypothesize:
H3a: When the desire for openness is enhanced (com-
pared with a control condition in which it is unchanged),
locals’ preference for access-based consumption is ele-
vated, whereas globals’ preference for access-based con-
sumption is unaffected.
H3b: When the desire for openness is suppressed (com-
pared with a control condition in which it is unchanged),
globals’ preference for access-based consumption is
reduced, whereas locals’ preference for access-based con-
sumption is unaffected.
Closely related to the consumption openness logic, consumers’
traveler versus settler orientation is another theoretically relevant
moderator. Individuals with a traveler orientation tend to value
mobility, view the world from a “routes perspective,” and
engage in transient, open, and mobile social networks and
new environments. In contrast, those with a settler orientation
value stability, view the world from a “roots perspective,” and
prefer closed, stable, and traditional social networks that facili-
tate long-lasting relationships with their surrounding environ-
ment (Oishi 2010). Because traveling can open consumers up
to different places, experiences, and ideas (Wang, Kirmani,
and Li 2021), it is natural to expect that consumers with a trav-
eler orientation will seek options that facilitate temporality and
mobility and therefore assign less value to permanent owner-
ship. For them, long-term stability and permanence can be bur-
densome because they believe their lifestyles and surrounding
environments are constantly changing. This theorizing echoes
Bardhi, Eckhardt, and Arnould’s (2012) ﬁndings that individu-
als who have a greater need for mobility (and thus an accessible
traveler orientation) are more detached from possessions, and
they tend to relate to objects in a temporary way. In contrast,
individuals who have a settler orientation may be more oriented
toward satisfying their fundamental need for long-term stability.
For example, Oishi et al. (2007) showed that individuals consid-
ering a stable lifestyle (and thus an accessible settler orientation)
are more likely to engage in procommunity behavior to maintain
a stable relationship with their surrounding environment.
The previous discussion suggests that traveler–settler orien-
tation can indirectly inﬂuence consumers’ consumption open-
ness. When a traveler orientation is made salient, the need for
temporality and mobility opens consumers up and enhances
consumption openness, whereas when a settler orientation is
made salient, the need for long-term stability and permanence
suppresses consumption openness.
Overview of the Present Research
We tested our hypotheses in seven studies using a variety of
operationalizations of both global–local identity and preference
for access-based consumption. Studies 1a and 1b provide evi-
dence that globals (vs. locals) have a greater preference for
access-based consumption, using the country-level KOF
Index of Globalization (Globalization Index) as a proxy for con-
sumers’ global–local identity. Study 2a primes global–local
identity and examines preference for access-based consumption
Nie et al.
559

(i.e., relative preference between an accessed option and a pur-
chase option of a camping tent). Moreover, Study 2a demon-
strates that consumption openness is a key underlying
mechanism. Study 2b examines the effect of global–local iden-
tity on preference for access-based consumption in a between-
subjects design and obtained consistent ﬁndings. Study 3 reveal
that experimentally enhancing a desire for openness increases
locals’ preference for access-based consumption, whereas sup-
pressing a desire for openness reduces globals’ preference for
access-based consumption. However, when a desire for open-
ness was unchanged, globals (vs. locals) show a greater prefer-
ence for access-based consumption, as in previous studies.
Study 4 examines another boundary condition, namely, traveler
(vs. settler) orientation, that enhances (vs. suppresses) con-
sumption openness. Finally, Study 5 tests the link between
global–local identity and preference for access-based consump-
tion in a ﬁeld study with real consumers and provides additional
evidence on consumption openness as the key mechanism
underlying these effects.
Study 1a: Secondary Data at the Country
Level
Method
Study 1a aims to examine the relationship between global–local
identity and preference for access-based consumption in the real
world across different countries. We examined the average
revenue per user (ARPU) for three car-sharing systems, includ-
ing peer-to-peer car-sharing (e.g., Uber), short-term car access
(e.g., Zipcar), and car rental across countries. The three car-
sharing markets represent automobile sharing systems that are
popular alternatives to car ownership, and they vary in the
degree of sharing and commodity exchange attributes, thus
offering a perfect context for examining the preference for
access-based consumption among countries that differ in
local–global identity.
Through the Statista database, we obtained the 2019 ARPU
data (from January through December) for peer-to-peer car
sharing (144 countries), short-term car access (64 countries),
and car rental (144 countries; for details see Web Appendix
A). ARPU captures the revenue per user generated from
each of the three car-sharing systems at the country level,
with a higher number representing more revenue generated
by each user and thus a greater preference for access-based
consumption in that particular country. Given that these data
were collected from various countries, we used country-level
global–local identity as an explanatory factor for the obtained
car-sharing data. Following Gao, Zhang, and Mittal (2017),
we used the KOF Index of Globalization to capture the
country-level global–local identity, with a higher score reﬂect-
ing a greater degree of global identity. To provide a more rig-
orous test, we included each country’s gross domestic product
(GDP) and Hofstede’s six cultural dimensions (power dis-
tance, individualism, masculinity, uncertainty avoidance,
long-term orientation, and indulgence) as covariates in our
analysis. The GDP data came from the World Bank 2019.
Missing values on these cultural dimensions decreased our
sample size from 144 to 89 for peer-to-peer car sharing
and car rental, and from 64 to 57 for short-term car access
(for correlation matrix of variables, see Table WA1 in Web
Appendix A).
Results and Discussion
H1 states that globals have a greater preference for access-based
consumption than locals. To test H1, we performed three sepa-
rate regression analyses, using the ARPU of each of the three
automobile sharing systems as the dependent variable, the
Globalization Index as the independent variable, and the coun-
try’s GDP and Hofstede’s six cultural dimensions as covariates
(all variance inﬂation factors < 2.5). As shown in Table 1,
results consistently showed that the Globalization Index was
signiﬁcantly and positively related to the ARPU of peer-to-peer
car sharing (β = .43, t(80) = 4.73, p < .001), short-term car
access (β = .48, t(48) = 3.34, p = .002), and car rental (β = .56,
t(80) = 6.69, p < .001), after controlling for the effects of other
country-level factors. These results provide converging evi-
dence in support of H1.
Study 1a provides initial evidence on our proposed link
between global–local identity and preference for access-based
consumption, using the country-level car-sharing data and the
Globalization Index. In line with our theorizing, the results
show that globals had a greater preference for access-based con-
sumption for all three sharing systems, regardless their degree
of sharing and commodity exchange attributes. These results
are robust after controlling for the effects of GDP and other cul-
tural dimensions.
Table 1. Regressiona Results of Globalization Index on Preference for
Access-Based Consumption (Study 1a).
Peer-to-Peer
Car Sharing
Short-Term
Car Access
Car
Rental
Globalization
Index
.43***
.48**
.56***
Country’s GDP
.13*
.07n.s.
.17**
Power distance
−.16n.s.
−.08n.s.
−.12n.s.
Individualism
.19n.s.
.32*
.19*
Masculinity
−.08n.s.
.04n.s.
−.02n.s.
Uncertainty
avoidance
−.24**
−.25*
−.02n.s.
Long-term
orientation
.08n.s.
−.33*
.03n.s.
Indulgence
.16n.s.
.06n.s.
.16*
R-square
.70
.55
.75
n.s.p > .05.
*p < .05.
**p < .01.
***p < .001.
aWe used “missing cases pairwise” in the analyses.
560
Journal of Marketing Research 59(3)

Study 1b: Country-Level Data on Home
Purchase
Method
In Study 1b, we obtained consumers’ home purchase index
for 50 countries (for additional information, see Web
Appendix B) in 2018 from the Home Ownership Rate Data
Set (Trading Economy 2018). Purchase index is measured
as the ratio of owner-occupied units to total residential
units in the countries, ranging from 26.00% to 98.85%. As
in Study 1a, we used the Globalization Index to capture the
country-level global–local identity. We included each coun-
try’s GDP, property price index, and Hofstede’s six cultural
dimensions as covariates in our analysis (all variance inﬂa-
tion factors < 2.2). Missing values on these cultural dimen-
sions decreased our sample size from 50 to 44 countries
(for correlation matrix of variables, see Table WA2 in Web
Appendix B).
Results and Discussion
Because our sample size was small, we estimated several
models, as reported in Table 2. Models 1 and 2 examined the
effect of Globalization Index on purchase index without consid-
ering Hofstede’s six cultural dimensions. Speciﬁcally, Model 1
contained only the control variables of countries’ GDP and
property price index. Results showed that GDP is negatively
related to purchase index (β = −.36, t(47) = −2.61, p = .01),
such that GDP reduces consumers’ tendency to purchase a
home (and thus increased consumers’ tendency to rent). The
effect of property price index was not signiﬁcant (β = .04,
t(47) = −.29, p = .78). In Model 2, we added the country-level
Globalization Index into the analysis and found that the associ-
ation between the Globalization Index and purchase index is
negative and signiﬁcant (β = −.40, t(46) = −2.35, p = .02), sug-
gesting that the greater a country’s globalization, the lower its
preference for purchase (and thus the greater its preference
for access-based consumption).
Models 3 and 4 contain the six cultural dimensions. We fol-
lowed Gao, Zhang, and Mittal (2017) and ran a two-step anal-
ysis. In the ﬁrst step, Model 3 was used to identify the
statistically signiﬁcant cultural dimensions that should be spec-
iﬁed as control variables in Model 4. In the second step, Model
4 contained only statistically signiﬁcant cultural dimensions,
along with the Globalization Index, GDP, and property price
index. Out of the six cultural dimensions, only indulgence
was signiﬁcantly associated with purchase index. We therefore
included indulgence, GDP, and property price index as covari-
ates along with the key predictor, Globalization Index, in Model
4. As Table 2 shows, only indulgence (β = −.38, t(39) = −2.35,
p = .02) is negatively associated with purchase index. More
importantly, Globalization Index is signiﬁcantly and negatively
related to purchase index (β = −.48, t(39) = −2.67, p = .01),
after we controlled for the effects of indulgence and other
country-level factors. These results are consistent with H1.
Extending the results of Studies 1a and 1b, we also con-
ducted an additional study at the individual level (Study 6 in
Web Appendix C) with 172 U.S. consumers using self-reported
car-sharing behavior that occurred in the past three years.
Results showed that consumers with a salient global (vs.
local) identity had a greater preference for access-based con-
sumption, as reﬂected by the frequency of using car-sharing ser-
vices, percentage of time spent on car sharing, and monetary
spending on car sharing.
A limitation of Studies 1a and 1b is that the analyses were
correlational and could not provide evidence on the causal
direction. To address this issue, we conducted a study (Study
7 in Web Appendix D) in which we manipulated consumers’
global–local identity and examined their decision on their like-
lihood to choose between an accessed option and a purchase
option for a beach volleyball. Results showed that participants
with a global identity had a greater likelihood of choosing the
accessed (vs. purchase) option than those with a local identity.
Although previous studies provide convergent evidence,
none of them tested the mediating role of consumption open-
ness (H2). We aimed to test it in the next study, while investi-
gating responsibility toward the environment as an alternative
explanation. Previous research suggests that globals (vs.
locals) feel more responsibility toward the environment (Ng
and Basu 2019). The link between global–local identity and
preference for access-based consumption may be driven by
globals’ perceived responsibility toward the environment. We
examine this possibility in Study 2a.
Study 2a: Mediation Test in a Within-Subject
Design
Method
Two hundred workers from Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk;
115 men; Mage = 36.75 years, SD = 11.15 years) were randomly
Table 2. Regression Results of Globalization Index on Home
Purchase Index (Study 1b).
Model
1
Model
2
Model
3a
Model
4a
Globalization Index
−.40*
−.48*
Country’s GDP
−.36*
−.19n.s.
−.04n.s.
Property purchase
index
.04n.s.
−.16n.s.
−.35n.s.
Uncertainty avoidance
.18n.s.
Masculinity
−.19n.s.
Power distance
−.11n.s.
Individualism
−.07n.s.
Long-term orientation
−.35n.s.
Indulgence
−.50*
−.38*
R-square
.13
.22
.33
.32
n.s.p > .05.
*p < .05.
aWe used “missing cases pairwise” in the analyses.
Nie et al.
561

assigned to either a global or a local identity condition.
Following Ng and Batra (2017), in the global identity condition,
participants read a paragraph discussing globalization and
wrote down three things that embody their identity as a
member of the world, whereas in the local identity condition,
participants read an analogous paragraph about being a
citizen of their city and wrote down three things that embody
their identity as a citizen of the city (for details, see Web
Appendix E). The manipulation check comprised three items
from Zhang and Khare (2009; e.g., “For the time being, I
mainly identify myself as a …”; 1 = “Global citizen,” and 7 =
“Local citizen”; for all the measures used in the article, see
Appendix B). We averaged these three items to form an identity
index (α = .90), with a higher number indicating a greater level
of local identity.
Afterward, in an ostensibly unrelated task, participants were
asked to imagine that they were shopping for a camping tent
and were deciding between an accessed option and a purchase
option. Participants viewed the information for the accessed
option (Option A) and the purchase option (Option B). We
obtained product information from major online retailers to
help create stimuli (see Appendix C). Participants were asked
to indicate their relative preference for the accessed option
(1 = “deﬁnitely Option A,” and 7 = “deﬁnitely Option B”),
which was reverse coded, with a higher value indicating a
greater preference for Option A (the accessed option).
Thereafter, participants rated their consumption openness (1 =
“strongly
disagree,”
and
7 = “strongly
agree”),
using
a
three-item measure (e.g., “At present, I am open to diversiﬁed
products and services”; α = .72; for the scale development,
see Web Appendix F). Perceived responsibility toward the envi-
ronment was assessed using a two-item scale (e.g., “I think pro-
tecting the environment is my responsibility”; r = .48) adopted
from Ng and Basu (2019).
Results and Discussion
Manipulation check. As we expected, participants in the local
identity condition (M = 5.15) perceived themselves more as
local citizens than those in the global identity condition (M =
4.68; F(1, 198) = 4.68, p = .03, η2
p = .02), suggesting that the
global–local identity prime was effective.
Effect on preference for access-based consumption. Consistent
with H1, the one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) on the rel-
ative preference score showed that those in the global identity
condition (M = 4.11) were more likely to choose the accessed
option than those in the local identity condition (M = 3.43;
F(1, 198) = 4.94, p = .03, η2
p = .02).
Mediation analysis. H2 speciﬁes that consumption openness
mediates the relationship between global–local identity and pref-
erence for access-based consumption. To assess this proposed
mechanism, we performed a mediation analysis using Model 4
of Hayes’s (2017) PROCESS. As we predicted in H2, the analy-
sis in which global–local identity was the independent variable,
consumption openness was the mediator, and the relative prefer-
ence for the accessed option was the dependent variable showed
a signiﬁcant indirect effect (.1264, 95% conﬁdence interval [CI]:
[.0050, .2823]; Figure 2). We conducted a mediation analysis and
found that perceived responsibility toward the environment
cannot be a mediator (see Web Appendix G).
Study 2a demonstrates that the relationship between global–
local identity and preference for access-based consumption is
mediated by consumption openness. Speciﬁcally, consumers
with a global (vs. local) identity have higher consumption open-
ness, which in turn leads to a greater preference for the accessed
option. Perceived responsibility toward the environment is
unlikely to be an alternative explanation for our ﬁndings.
The next study diverges from Study 2a in two important
aspects: First, whereas Study 2a examined preference for
access-based consumption when both accessed and purchase
options were presented together, Study 2b examines preference
for access-based consumption when the accessed option and the
purchase option are presented separately. This is an important
methodological distinction because prior research has shown
that consumers exhibit preference reversals for the same
options when they are presented separately instead of jointly
(Hsee 1996). Second, in addition to the measure of preference
for the accessed option, we include a measure of willingness
to use access-based programs in Study 2b. Besides, we aim to
test prevention focus as another alternative explanation. Ng
and Batra (2017) found that locals (vs. globals) tend to adopt
prevention goals, which may impede locals’ preference for
access-based
consumption
(Hazée,
Delcourt,
and
Van
Vaerenbergh 2017). We test this possibility in Study 2b.
Figure 2. The mediating role of consumption openness (Study 2a).
562
Journal of Marketing Research 59(3)

Study 2b: Mediation Test in a
Between-Subjects Design
Method
Two hundred seventy MTurk workers (177 men; Mage = 38.73
years, SD = 12.22 years) participated in Study 2b in exchange
for a small monetary reward. We randomly assigned partici-
pants to a 2 (identity: global vs. local) × 2 (decision option:
access vs. purchase) between-subjects design.
Following Gao, Zhang, and Mittal (2017), we primed
global–local
identity
through
either
a
“Think
Global
Movement” or a “Think Local Movement” campaign (see
Web Appendix H). The “Think Global Movement” focuses
on global news and highlights cultures from other parts of the
world. Conversely, the “Think Local Movement” focuses on
local news and preserves the local traditions. Participants
were asked to write their initials under the campaign to show
their support for the speciﬁc movement. Afterward, they
responded to the same global–local identity manipulation
check questions (α = .91) as in Study 2a.
Then, participants were directed to an ostensibly unrelated
product evaluation task, in which they were assigned to either
a bike for access or a bike for purchase condition. Following
Lamberton and Rose (2012), participants were asked to
imagine that they are considering obtaining a bike. In a reputable
bike store, they see an ad showing that they could purchase [join
a bike-sharing program to rent] a bike (for the stimuli, see Web
Appendix I). Afterward, participants rated their intention to pur-
chase [rent] the bike using a three-item scale (e.g., “How likely
are you to purchase [rent] the bike from the store?”; 1 = “very
unlikely,” and 7 = “very likely”; αaccess = .89 and αpurchase =
.91; Ma, Yang, and Mourali 2014). We then asked participants
to respond to a measure of willingness to use access-based pro-
grams using a two-item scale (e.g., “How likely are you willing
to participate in the bike sharing program?”; 1 = “very unlikely,”
and 7 = “very likely”; r = .72). Participants then responded to the
consumption openness questions (α = .85) as in Study 2a.
Participants’ prevention focus was measured with a nine-
item scale adopted from Lockwood, Jordan, and Kunda
(2002; e.g., “In general, I am focused on preventing negative
events in my life”; 1 = “strongly disagree,” and 7 = “strongly
agree”; α = .88).
Results and Discussion
Manipulation check. We conducted a full-factorial ANOVA on
the identity index with the global–local identity prime, decision
option, and their interaction term as the independent variables.
Reassuringly, only the main effect of the global–local identity
prime was statistically signiﬁcant (F(1, 266) = 38.40, p < .001,
η2
p = .13). Participants in the local identity condition (M= 5.55)
perceived themselves more as local citizens than those in the
global identity condition (M= 4.37). Neither the main effect of
decision option nor the interaction term was signiﬁcant (ps >
.50). Thus, the global–local identity prime was successful.
Effect on preference for access-based consumption. We performed
two separate full-factorial ANOVA analyses, one with the
measure of adoption intention and the other with the measure
of willingness to use access-based programs, as the dependent
variable. In the ﬁrst analysis, a 2 (identity) × 2 (decision
option) ANOVA on adoption intention revealed no effect of
identity (F(1, 266) = .34, p = .56, η2
p = .001) or decision option
(F(1, 266) = .35, p = .56, η2
p = .001), but more importantly, it
did show a signiﬁcant identity × decision option interaction
(F(1, 266) = 13.57, p < .001, η2
p = .05). In the access condition,
globals (M = 5.55) had a greater intention to rent the bike
than locals (M = 5.08; F(1, 266) = 4.77, p = .03, η2
p = .02).
Yet, in the purchase condition, locals (M = 5.73) had a greater
intention to purchase the bike than globals (M = 5.08; F(1,
266) = 9.17, p = .003, η2
p = .03; Figure 3, Panel A).
Drawing on our theory, we expect globals to show a greater
preference for access-based consumption than locals in both
access and purchase conditions. As we expected, in the
second analysis, a 2 (identity) × 2 (decision option) ANOVA
on willingness to use access-based programs showed signiﬁcant
main effects of identity (F(1, 266) = 8.30, p = .004, η2
p = .03)
and decision option (F(1, 266) = 7.59, p = .006, η2
p = .03) but
no signiﬁcant identity × decision option two-way interaction
(F(1, 266) = .01, p = .93, η2
p < .001). In the access condition,
globals showed a greater willingness to use access-based pro-
grams (M = 5.53) than locals (M = 5.04; F(1, 266) = 3.87, p =
.05, η2
p = .01). Moreover, in the purchase condition, globals
(M = 5.07) showed a greater willingness score than locals
(M = 4.55; F(1, 266) = 4.45, p = .04, η2
p = .02; Figure 3, Panel B).
Mediation analysis. To reassess the proposed mediating role of
consumption openness, we performed two mediation analyses
using Model 15 of Hayes’s (2017) PROCESS. In the ﬁrst medi-
ation analysis, global–local identity was the independent vari-
able,
adoption
intention
was
the
dependent
variable,
consumption openness was the mediator, and decision option
was the moderator. Results show that consumption openness
mediated the effect of global–local identity on adoption inten-
tion (.2938, 95% CI: [.0626, .5934]; Figure WA1, Panel A, in
Web Appendix J). In the second mediation analysis, willingness
to use access-based programs was the dependent variable.
Consistently, results show that consumption openness mediated
the effect of global–local identity on willingness to use access-
based programs (.1356, 95% CI: [.0039, .3309]; Figure WA1,
Panel B, in Web Appendix J). These results support H2 and rep-
licate the ﬁndings of Study 2a in a between-subjects design. We
also tested the role of prevention focus and found that it cannot
serve as a mediator (Web Appendix K).
In a between-subjects design, Study 2b replicated previous
ﬁndings that the effect of global–local identity on preference
for access-based consumption is mediated by consumption
openness. Notably, preference for access-based consumption
was reﬂected by both a measure of adoption intention and a
measure of willingness to use access-based programs. As we
show in Study 8 (Web Appendix L), consideration of
Nie et al.
563

opportunity costs and perceived newness of the accessed option
cannot be alternative explanations of our ﬁndings. In Study 3,
we aim to provide additional evidence of the underlying
process by manipulating desire for openness.
Study 3: Desire for Openness
Method
Study 3 featured a 2 (identity: global vs. local) × 3 (desire for
openness: enhanced, suppressed, unchanged) between-subjects
design. Four hundred thirty-seven MTurk workers (190 men;
Mage = 38.93 years, SD = 12.26 years) participated in exchange
for a small monetary reward.
Following Zhang and Khare (2009), we manipulated global–
local identity using a sentence-unscrambling task. Those in the
global identity condition were instructed to construct 15 grammat-
ically correct sentences using such scrambled sentences as “events
know I global.” Those in the local identity condition were asked to
ﬁnish the same task using different sentences, such as “events
know I local” (see Web Appendix M). Thereafter, participants
were randomly assigned to one of the three desire-for-openness
conditions using a writing task. In the desire-for-openness-
enhanced [suppressed] condition, participants read the statement,
“When we are making decisions, being open-minded can some-
times be beneﬁcial [detrimental],” and then they were asked to
provide three reasons to support the statement. Those in the
desire-for-openness-unchanged (control) condition were asked to
review their daily routine and write down their thoughts and feel-
ings at that moment. As detailed in Web Appendix N, a pretest
among a separate group of 113 participants demonstrated the
validity of our desire-for-openness prime.
After completing the writing task for the desire-for-openness
manipulation, participants were exposed to the same shopping
task as in Study 2a and asked to indicate their preference
between the accessed and purchase options of a camping tent.
They were then asked to complete the same questions regarding
willingness to use access-based programs for the tent (r = .80),
consumption openness (α = .85), and global–local identity
manipulation check (α = .93) as in Study 2b.
Results and Discussion
Manipulation check. To test the effectiveness of our global–local
identity manipulation. we conducted a 2 (identity) × 3 (desire
for openness) ANOVA on the global–local identity index
with the global–local identity prime, desire-for-openness
prime, and their interaction term as the independent variables.
Results revealed only a signiﬁcant main effect of global–local
identity (Mlocal = 5.15 vs. Mglobal = 4.39; F(1, 431) = 21.57, p
< .001, η2
p = .05); no other effects were signiﬁcant (desire for
openness: F(2, 431) = 2.65, p = .07, η2
p = .01; interaction: F(2,
431) = 1.08, p = .34, η2
p < .01). These results indicate that our
global–local identity prime is effective.
Effect on preference for access-based consumption. We performed
two separate full-factorial ANOVA analyses, one with the relative
preference measure and the other with the measure of willingness
to use access-based programs as the dependent variable. In the ﬁrst
analysis, a 2 (identity)× 3 (desire for openness) ANOVA on the
relative preference score revealed signiﬁcant main effects of
desire for openness (F(2, 431) =9.25, p<.001, η2
p = .04) and
global–local identity (F(1, 431)= 5.95, p= .02, η2
p =.01) but—
more importantly, and pertinent to our hypothesis—a signiﬁcant
global–local identity ×desire for openness two-way interaction
(F(2, 431)= 3.08, p= .047, η2
p =.01). Similarly, the second 2
(identity)×3 (desire for openness) ANOVA on the willingness
score showed signiﬁcant main effects of desire for openness
Figure 3. The effect of global–local identity on preference for
access-based-consumption (Study 2b).
Notes: Error bars represent ±1 SEs.
564
Journal of Marketing Research 59(3)

(F(2, 431)= 11.75, p< .001, η2
p =.05) and identity (F(1, 431)=
7.76, p= .006, η2
p =.02) as well as a signiﬁcant desire for openness
× identity interaction (F(2, 431)=3.66, p =.03, η2
p =.02). As
detailed in Web Appendix N, results in the control condition rep-
licated previous ﬁndings that globals tend to have a greater prefer-
ence for access-based consumption than locals.
Testing H3a. H3a states that when desire for openness is
enhanced, locals’ (but not globals’) preference for access-based
consumption would be elevated. To test H3a, we compared pref-
erence
for
access-based
consumption
in
the
desire-for-
openness-enhanced and control conditions for locals and
globals separately. For locals in these two conditions, a
one-way ANOVA on the relative preference score showed a
signiﬁcant effect of desire for openness (F(1, 166) = 9.03, p =
.003, η2
p = .05). Locals’ relative preference for the accessed
option was greater in the desire-for-openness-enhanced condi-
tion (M = 4.09) than in the control condition (M = 2.99;
Figure 4, Panel A). Similarly, a one-way ANOVA on the will-
ingness score showed a signiﬁcant effect of desire for openness
(F(1, 166) = 12.79, p < .001, η2
p = .07). Locals’ willingness to
use
access-based
programs
was
greater
in
the
desire-
for-openness-enhanced
condition
(M = 5.06)
than
in
the
control condition (M = 3.96; Figure 4, Panel B).
For
globals
in
the
desire-for-openness-enhanced
and
control conditions, a one-way ANOVA on the relative prefer-
ence score revealed no effect of desire for openness (F(1,
147) < .01, p = .96, η2
p < .001). Globals had similar levels of
preference for the accessed option across desire-for-openness-
enhanced
(M = 4.32)
and
control
(M = 4.30;
Figure
4,
Panel A) conditions. Similarly, a one-way ANOVA on the
willingness score showed no effect of desire for openness
(F(1, 147) = .04, p = .84, η2
p < .001). Globals had similar levels
of
willingness
to
use
access-based
programs
across
desire-for-openness-enhanced (M = 5.21) and control (M =
5.16; Figure 4, Panel B) conditions. Taken together, these
results support H3a.
Testing H3b. H3b speciﬁes that when desire for openness is sup-
pressed, globals’ (but not locals’) preference for access-based
consumption would be reduced. To test H3b, we compared pref-
erence
for
access-based
consumption
in
the
desire-for-
openness-suppressed and control conditions for globals and
locals separately. For globals in these two conditions, a
one-way ANOVA on the relative preference score revealed a
signiﬁcant effect of desire for openness (F(1, 136) = 11.38, p
= .001, η2
p = .08). Globals had a lower preference for the
accessed option in the desire-for-openness-suppressed condi-
tion (M = 3.05) than in the control condition (M = 4.30;
Figure 4, Panel A). Similarly, a one-way ANOVA on the will-
ingness score revealed a signiﬁcant effect of desire for openness
(F(1, 136) = 10.70, p = .001, η2
p = .07). Globals had a lower
willingness to use access-based programs in the desire-
for-openness-suppressed condition (M = 4.12) than in the
control condition (M = 5.16; Figure 4, Panel B).
For locals in the desire-for-openness-suppressed and control
conditions, a one-way ANOVA on the relative preference score
revealed no effect of desire for openness (F(1, 139) =.01, p=
.92, η2
p <.001). Locals’ preference for the accessed option did
not differ across the desire-for-openness-suppressed (M= 2.95)
and control (M=2.99; Figure 4, Panel A) conditions. Similarly,
a one-way ANOVA on the willingness score revealed no effect
of desire for openness (F(1, 139)=.01, p=.91, η2
p <.001).
Locals’ willingness to use access-based programs did not differ
across desire-for-openness-suppressed (M= 3.92) and control (M
= 3.96; Figure 4, Panel B) conditions, in support of H3b.
Figure 4. The effect of global–local identity on preference for
access-based consumption (Study 3).
Notes: Error bars represent ±1 SEs.
Nie et al.
565

Effect on consumption openness. Our theorization rests on the
assumption that enhancing the desire for openness increases
locals’ (but not globals’) consumption openness, whereas sup-
pressing desire for openness reduces globals’ (but not locals’)
consumption openness. A 2 (identity) × 3 (desire for openness)
ANOVA on the consumption openness index showed a signiﬁ-
cant main effect of desire for openness (F(2, 431) = 7.74, p =
.001, η2
p = .04), no main effect of global–local identity (F(1,
431) = 1.77, p = .18, η2
p < .01), and, more importantly, a signiﬁ-
cant interaction between desire for openness and global–local
identity (F(2, 431) = 3.22, p = .04, η2
p = .02).
To test our assumption, we ﬁrst compared consumption
openness in the desire-for-openness-enhanced and control con-
ditions for locals and globals separately. For locals in these two
conditions, a one-way ANOVA on consumption openness
revealed a signiﬁcant effect of desire for openness (F(1, 166)
= 10.01, p = .002, η2
p = .06). Locals had a stronger consumption
openness in the desire-for-openness-enhanced condition (M =
5.85) than in the control condition (M = 5.32). In contrast, for
globals in these two conditions, a one-way ANOVA on con-
sumption openness showed no effect of desire for openness
(F(1, 147) = .01, p = .92, η2
p < .001). Globals’ consumption
openness did not differ across desire-for-openness-enhanced
(M = 5.77) and control (M = 5.78) conditions.
We then compared consumption openness across the
desire-for-openness-suppressed and control conditions for
locals and globals separately. For globals in these two condi-
tions, a one-way ANOVA on consumption openness showed
a signiﬁcant effect of desire for openness (F(1, 136) = 8.16,
p = .005, η2
p = .06). Globals had a lower consumption openness
in the desire-for-openness-suppressed condition (M = 5.33)
than in the control condition (M = 5.78). In contrast, for
locals in these two conditions, a one-way ANOVA on con-
sumption openness revealed no effect of desire for openness
(F(1, 139) = .001, p = .98, η2
p < .001). Locals’ consumption
openness did not differ in the desire-for-openness-suppressed
(M = 5.32) and control (M = 5.32) conditions. These results
together validate our assumptions.
Moderated-mediation
analysis. We
performed
two
separate
moderated-mediation analyses using Model 7 in PROCESS
(Hayes 2017). In the ﬁrst analysis, global–local identity was
the independent variable, the relative preference score was the
dependent variable, consumption openness was the mediator,
and desire for openness (−1= control, 0= suppressed, and
1= enhanced) was the moderator. The moderated mediation
model was signiﬁcant (−.1474, 95% CI: [−.3676, −.0066]).
Speciﬁcally, consumption openness mediated the effect of
global–local identity on the relative preference score in the
control condition (.1249, 95% CI: [.0075, .3262]), but not in the
desire-for-openness-enhanced
(−.0225;
95%
CI:
[−.1113,
.0658]) or suppressed (.0030, 95% CI: [−.1278, .1039];
Figure WA2, Panel A, in Web Appendix J) conditions. In the
second analysis, in which the willingness score was the dependent
variable, the moderated mediation model was also signiﬁcant
(−.3865, 95% CI: [−.7318, −.0752]). Speciﬁcally, consumption
openness mediated the effect of global–local identity on the will-
ingness score in the control condition (.3274, 95% CI: [.0897,
.6024]) but not in the desire-for-openness-enhanced (−.0591;
95% CI: [−.2647, .1454]) or suppressed (.0079; 95% CI:
[−.2559, .2690]; Figure WA2, Panel B, in Web Appendix J)
conditions.
Study 3 demonstrated that increasing the desire for openness
enhanced locals’ (but not globals’) preference for access-based
consumption, whereas suppressing the desire for openness
reduced globals’ (but not locals’) preference for access-based
consumption. These ﬁndings provide further support for our
proposed consumption openness account. It is worth noting
that in the control condition, globals have a greater preference
for access-based consumption than locals, replicating previous
ﬁndings. The next study examines traveler–settler orientation as
a boundary condition. If our proposed mechanism holds, acti-
vating traveler orientation should enhance individuals’ con-
sumption openness. We should replicate the ﬁndings in the
desire-for-openness-enhanced condition; however, activating
settler orientation should reduce consumption openness. We
should replicate the ﬁndings in the desire-for-openness-sup-
pressed condition.
Study 4: Traveler Versus Settler Orientation
Method
Study 4 featured a 2 (identity: global vs. local) × 3 (orientation:
traveler, settler, control) between-subjects design. Six hundred
twelve MTurk workers (376 men; Mage = 37.41 years, SD =
13.60 years) participated in exchange for a small monetary
reward.
We manipulated global and local identity using a “Think
Global/Local Movement” as in Study 2b. Thereafter, partici-
pants were randomly assigned to one of the three orientation
conditions using a writing task. In the traveler orientation
[settler orientation] condition, participants were described the
deﬁnition of a traveler (i.e., a person who is traveling or who
often travels; Merriam-Webster 2018b) [settler (i.e., a person
who settles in an area; Merriam-Webster 2018a)] and then
were asked to write down three beneﬁts of being a traveler
[settler]. Participants in the control condition were asked to
review their daily routine and write down their thoughts and
feelings at that moment. As reported in Web Appendix O, we
validated the traveler–settler orientation prime through a
pretest using a separate group of 292 participants.
Afterward, as in Study 2a, participants viewed information
about the accessed and purchase option of a camping tent and
indicated their relative preference for the accessed (vs. pur-
chase) option. This study also included the measure of willing-
ness to use access-based programs (r = .74), as in Study
3. Participants were then asked to answer ﬁve questions on trav-
eler orientation (e.g., “At present, I feel that I belong to the trav-
eler community”; α = .95), and another ﬁve questions on settler
orientation (e.g., “At this time, I feel that I belong to the settler
566
Journal of Marketing Research 59(3)

community”; α = .95). They also responded to the same con-
sumption openness questions (α = .89) and global–local iden-
tity manipulation checks (α = .96) as in Study 3.
Results and Discussion
Manipulation check. To test the effectiveness of our identity
manipulation, we conducted a 2 (identity) × 3 (orientation)
ANOVA on the identity index with global–local identity, trav-
eler–settler orientation, and their interaction as the independent
variables. Results revealed only a signiﬁcant main effect of
global–local identity (Mlocal = 4.73 vs. Mglobal = 3.54; F(1,
606) = 76.98, p < .001, η2
p = .11); no other effects were signiﬁ-
cant (orientation: F(1, 606) = 1.32, p = .27, η2
p = .004; interac-
tion: F(1, 606) = 2.72, p = .07, η2
p = .009). Thus, the global–
local identity manipulation was successful, and it was not con-
founded by the traveler–settler orientation prime.
Effect on preference for access-based consumption. We performed
two separate ANOVA analyses, one with the relative preference
measure and the other with the willingness to use access-based
programs as the dependent variable. In the ﬁrst analysis, a 2
(identity) × 3 (orientation) ANOVA on the relative preference
score revealed signiﬁcant main effects of identity (F(1, 606) =
13.60, p < .001, η2
p = .02) and orientation (F(2, 606) = 20.92,
p < .001, η2
p = .07) and, more importantly, a signiﬁcant iden-
tity × orientation interaction (F(2, 606) = 6.26, p = .002, η2
p =
.02).
Similarly,
a
second
2
(identity) × 3
(orientation)
ANOVA on the willingness score showed signiﬁcant main
effects of identity (F(1, 606) = 9.03, p = .003, η2
p = .02) and ori-
entation (F(2, 606) = 14.57, p < .001, η2
p = .05), and a signiﬁcant
identity × orientation interaction (F(2, 606) = 3.98, p = .02, η2
p =
.01). Results in the control condition replicated previous ﬁnd-
ings that globals have a greater preference for access-based con-
sumption than locals (see Web Appendix O).
Testing H3a. We compared preference for access-based con-
sumption in the traveler orientation and control conditions for
locals and globals separately. For locals in these two conditions,
a one-way ANOVA on the relative preference score revealed a
signiﬁcant effect of traveler orientation (F(1, 179) = 21.36, p <
.001, η2
p = .11). Locals’ preference for the accessed option was
greater in the traveler orientation condition (M= 4.96) than in
the control condition (M= 3.43; Figure 5, Panel A). Similarly,
a one-way ANOVA on the willingness score showed a signiﬁ-
cant effect of traveler orientation (F(1, 179)= 14.59, p < .001,
η2
p = .08). Locals’ willingness to use access-based programs
was greater in the traveler orientation condition (M= 4.45)
than in the control condition (M= 3.42; Figure 5, Panel B).
For globals in the traveler orientation and control conditions, a
one-way ANOVA on the relative preference score revealed no
effect of traveler orientation (F(1, 170)= .08, p = .77, η2
p < .001).
Globals did not differ in their preference for the accessed option
across the traveler orientation (M = 5.14) and control (M = 5.04;
Figure 5, Panel A) conditions. Consistently, a one-way ANOVA
on the willingness score revealed no effect of traveler orientation
(F(1, 170) = .04, p = .85, η2
p < .001). Globals showed no signiﬁcant
difference inwillingness to use access-based programs across trav-
eler orientation (M= 4.53) and control (M= 4.47; Figure 5, Panel
B) conditions. Together, these results support H3a.
Testing H3b. We then compared preference for access-based con-
sumption in the settler orientation and control conditions for
locals and globals separately. For globals in these two conditions,
a one-way ANOVA on the relative preference score revealed a
signiﬁcant effect of settler orientation (F(1, 230) = 19.82, p <
.001, η2
p = .08). Globals had a lower preference for the accessed
option in the settler orientation condition (M= 3.71) than in the
Figure 5. The effect of global–local identity on preference for
access-based consumption (Study 4).
Notes: Error bars represent ±1 SEs.
Nie et al.
567

control condition (M= 5.04; Figure 5, Panel A). Similarly, a
one-way ANOVA on the willingness score revealed a signiﬁcant
effect of settler orientation (F(1, 230)= 12.19, p = .001, η2
p =
.05). Globals had a lower willingness to use access-based pro-
grams in the settler orientation condition (M= 3.60) than in the
control condition (M= 4.47; Figure 5, Panel B).
For locals in the settler orientation and control conditions, a
one-way ANOVA on the relative preference score revealed no
effect of settler orientation (F(1, 226) < .001, p = .99, η2
p < .001).
Locals’ preference for the accessed option did not differ across
settler orientation (M = 3.43) and control (M = 3.43; see
Figure 5, Panel A) conditions. Similarly, a one-way ANOVA
on the willingness score showed no effect of settler orientation
(F(1, 226) = .04, p = .84, η2
p < .001). Locals’ willingness to use
access-based programs did not differ across settler orientation
(M = 3.37) and control (M = 3.42; Figure 5, Panel B) condi-
tions, in support of H3b.
Effect on consumption openness. We theorize that activating
traveler orientation increases locals’ (but not globals’) consump-
tion openness, whereas activating settler orientation reduces
globals’ (but not locals’) consumption openness. A 2 (identity)
× 3 (orientation) ANOVA on consumption openness revealed
no effect of identity (F(1, 606) = 3.09, p = .08, η2
p = .005), a sig-
niﬁcant effect of orientation (F(2, 606) = 3.16, p = .04, η2
p = .01),
and, more importantly, a signiﬁcant interaction between orienta-
tion and identity (F(2, 606) = 6.56, p = .002, η2
p = .02). To test
our assumption, we ﬁrst compared consumption openness in
the traveler orientation and control conditions for locals and
globals separately. For locals in these two conditions, a
one-way ANOVA on consumption openness revealed a signiﬁ-
cant effect of traveler orientation (F(1, 179) = 5.90, p = .02, η2
p
= .03). Locals’ consumption openness was higher in the traveler
orientation condition (M = 5.59) than in the control condition (M
= 5.12). In contrast, for globals in these two conditions, a
one-way ANOVA on consumption openness revealed no effect
of traveler orientation (F(1, 170)= 1.65, p = .20, η2
p = .01).
Globals’ consumption openness did not differ across traveler ori-
entation (M= 5.55) and control (M= 5.78) conditions.
We then compared consumption openness in the settler orien-
tation and control conditions for locals and globals separately. For
globals in these two conditions, a one-way ANOVA on consump-
tion openness revealed a signiﬁcant effect of settler orientation
(F(1, 230)=12.94, p<.001, η2
p =.05). Globals’ consumption
openness
was
lower
in
the
settler
orientation
condition
(M=5.23) than in the control condition (M=5.78). In contrast,
for locals in these two conditions, a one-way ANOVA on con-
sumption openness revealed no effect of settler orientation (F(1,
226)= 1.48, p =.23, η2
p < .01). Locals’ consumption openness
did not differ across settler orientation (M=5.33) and control
(M=5.12) conditions. As reported in Web Appendix O, a serial
mediation analysis showed that global (local) identity activates
traveler (settler) orientation, which further enhances (suppresses)
consumption openness. The enhanced (suppressed) consumption
openness, in turn, increases (reduces) preference for access-based
consumption. These results are in support of our theorizing.
Study 4 provides additional evidence on the mediating role
of consumption openness by showing that (1) activating trav-
eler orientation enhances locals’ (but not globals’) consumption
openness, which in turn increases locals’ (but not globals’) pref-
erence for access-based consumption, and (2) activating settler
orientation reduces globals’ (but not locals’) consumption
openness, which in turn reduces globals’ (but not locals’) pref-
erence for access-based consumption. We conducted another
study (Study 9 in Web Appendix P) to test the generalizability
of our ﬁndings using a different product category that is natu-
rally associated with travel (i.e., car). Results of this study rep-
licated the ﬁndings of Study 4 and demonstrate that the effect
holds even when the product is naturally associated with travel-
ing. In the next study, we ascertain the relationship between
global–local identity and preference for access-based consump-
tion via a ﬁeld study.
Study 5: Field Study with Actual Choice
Study 5 aims to investigate a behavioral consequence of global–
local identity in a shop, which involves an actual choice
between an accessed option and a purchase option from real
consumers. One hundred sixty-two U.S. consumers (98 men;
Mage = 24.19 years, SD = 5.10 years) shopping at a bookstore
were recruited with an offer of $20 in total compensation,
either a $20 voucher to purchase a book (Tiny Habits) or a
$12.50 voucher to access the same book for six weeks, with
the remaining $7.50 in the form of a gift card (see Web
Appendix Q).
As in Study 2b, participants were ﬁrst given a brochure that
described either a “Think Global Movement” or a “Think Local
Movement,” which was used to manipulate global identity and
local identity, respectively. Next, participants were instructed
that the study would involve a brief survey on their book
reading history. Upon completing their book reading history,
they rated the three-item global–local identity manipulation
check questions (α = .98) and the three-item consumption open-
ness questions (α = .98) as in Study 4. Finally, participants were
asked to choose either the accessed option (with a $7.50 gift
card) or the purchase option of the book as compensation for
their participation.
Results
As we expected, participants assigned to the local identity con-
dition (M = 3.53) perceived themselves more as local citizens
than those in the global identity condition (M = 2.84; F(1,
160) = 4.32, p = .04, η2
p = .03), indicating the effectiveness of
our global–local identity manipulation. More importantly and
pertinent to our hypothesized effects, results on the choice of
the accessed option showed that more participants in the
global identity condition selected the accessed option (57.3%)
than those in the local identity condition (37.5%; χ2(1) = 6.38,
p = .01). The mediation analysis showed that consumption
openness mediated the effect of global–local identity on the
choice of the accessed option (.2309, 95% CI: [.0201, .5392];
568
Journal of Marketing Research 59(3)

Figure WA3 in Web Appendix J), suggesting that individuals
with an accessible global (vs. local) identity had a greater pref-
erence for the access-based consumption because of their con-
sumption openness.
We conducted another study (Study 10 in Web Appendix
R) by including a control condition in the identity manipula-
tion to determine whether the action comes from global iden-
tity, local identity, or both. Consistent with our expectations,
results of this study showed that consumers high in global
identity had a greater preference for access-based consump-
tion than those in the control condition, who then had a
greater preference for access-based consumption than those
high in local identity. These results suggest that actions orig-
inate from both identities.
General Discussion
Seven studies provide converging and robust evidence for the
role of global–local identity in consumer preference for access-
based consumption, using various operationalizations of the
key variables. Studies 1a and 1b provide initial evidence on
the association between global–local identity and preference
for access-based consumption at the country level, using car-
sharing data and home ownership data, respectively. Study 2a
(using a within-subjects design) and Study 2b (using a between-
subjects design) replicate Study 1’s ﬁndings using a subtle
global–local identity manipulation and shed light on the medi-
ating role of consumption openness, while ruling out perceived
responsibility toward the environment and prevention focus as
alternative explanations for our ﬁndings. Study 3 shows that
enhancing (suppressing) a desire for openness increased
(decreased) locals’ (globals’) preference for access-based con-
sumption. That is, when the desire for openness was enhanced
(suppressed), both (neither) globals and (nor) locals showed a
greater preference for access-based consumption. However,
when the desire for openness was unchanged, globals showed
a greater preference for access-based consumption than locals,
as in our previous studies. Study 4 examines the moderating
role of traveler (vs. settler) orientation. Finally, in a bookstore
with real consumers involving actual choices, Study 5 shows
that globals (vs. locals) are more likely to choose the accessed
option and provides further evidence on the mediating role of
consumption openness, enhancing the external validity and
offering readily applicable implications to marketers and
policy makers.
Theoretical Contributions
Our ﬁndings offer contributions to both the sharing economy
and consumer identity literature streams. Prior studies on con-
sumer preference for access-based consumption have mainly
focused on beneﬁt/cost considerations, consumer experi-
ences/perceptions about access, and individual differences
(e.g., Aspara and Wittkowski 2019; Habibi, Kim, and
Laroche 2016). However, little research has been conducted
to examine how consumer identity may affect preference for
access-based consumption. Among the rare exceptions,
Weiss (2017) showed that centrality of identity (e.g., skier)
decreases consumers’ tendency to access ski gear because
owning their own ski equipment is essential for their skier
identity. Extending Weiss’s work, our research suggests that
global–local
identity
may
be
a
boundary
condition.
Speciﬁcally, when consumers have a salient global identity,
they tend to be high in consumption openness, which in turn
increases their preference for the accessed option even when
the product is closely related to their self-identity (e.g., car
in Studies 1a, 6, and 9). In the context of car access
(Zipcar), Bardhi and Eckhardt (2012) showed that Zipcar
use is primarily driven by cost–beneﬁt considerations (e.g.,
reducing expenses, convenience) and that the users do not
foster a sense of identiﬁcation with the car. However, car
access may still connect to one’s identity. For example, one
of the Zipcar users viewed car access as a symbolic resource
to establish his identity as a smart consumer (Bardhi and
Eckhardt 2012). Extending their research, we causally
examine how cultural identity affects car access. To this
end, our ﬁndings represent a ﬁrst attempt in the access–iden-
tity literature to study the issues of how consumer identities
affect their access-based consumption, attesting the complex
relationship between identity and access as suggested by
Bardhi, Eckhardt, and Arnould (2012). Such a discovery
also provides novel insights into how globalization may inﬂu-
ence the sharing economy.
Second, our research contributes to the global–local identity
literature by revealing that consumption openness is a new qual-
itative difference between these two identities. Previous
research on global–local identity has theorized the distinction
between globals and locals, such as regulatory focus (Ng and
Batra 2017), sacriﬁce mindset (Gao, Zhang, and Mittal 2017),
perceived quality variance (Yang et al. 2019), and perceived
responsibility toward the environment (Ng and Basu 2019).
Extending their research, we show that consumption openness
is another theoretical distinction between local identity and
global identity. This important discovery can advance our
understanding of why locals are faithful to local traditions:
identiﬁcation with their local community drives them to be
less receptive to various options and ideas and thus be less
open. In contrast, globals are not bounded to a particular com-
munity and thus are more receptive and open to different expe-
riences and values. This discovery has implications not only for
preference for access-based consumption but also for other
research domains, such as variety seeking and new product
adoption.
Finally, this research contributes to the sharing economy
literature by uncovering the critical role of consumption open-
ness in explaining consumers’ preference for access-based
consumption. By showing the mediating role of consumption
openness, we also uncover important boundary conditions for
our effects. As such, our research represents the ﬁrst attempt to
offer theoretical explanations for the ﬁndings documented in
the cross-country literature on consumer preference for
access-based consumption. In so doing, our research also
Nie et al.
569

adds to the emergent research by introducing cultural identity
to the sharing economy literature. Notably, our research shows
that the effect of global–local identity on preference for
access-based consumption cannot be explained by other
factors (e.g., perceived responsibility toward the environment,
prevention focus, opportunity costs) that are closely related to
global–local identity. These ﬁndings are consistent with the
theoretical position that identity’s effects on consumer
responses are task speciﬁc (Gao, Zhang, and Mittal 2017;
Ng and Batra 2017; Yang et al. 2019).
Managerial Implications
Many retailers are expanding their business on a global
scale. Managers are aware of the important role that global
or local communities play in decision making, but they do
not have a clear idea about how global–local identity can
impact their strategies (Yang et al. 2019). This research
helps managers understand how to capitalize on the effect
of global–local identity to enhance consumers’ acceptance
of access-based programs. Our research indicates that
global (vs. local) identity increases preference for access-
based consumption. Thus, when marketers promote access-
based options, they can increase consumer preference by
activating their global identity. Communication appeals or
contextual cues, such as the “Think Global Movement”
(Studies 2b, 4, and 5), can be used to achieve this goal. In
addition, advertisements that embed global and multicultural
features (Study 2a) can also enhance consumer accessibility
of global identity.
Another approach to change consumer preference for access-
based consumption is to alter their consumption openness.
Marketers can use communication appeals or contextual cues
to accomplish this goal, such as those that feature the beneﬁts
of being open-minded (Study 3). TV channels that feature the
beneﬁts of traveling (Study 4) can be effective as well. From
a broader sense, our research echoes previous ﬁndings that
knowing which speciﬁc appeal resonates with respective con-
sumer segments can help marketers understand what messages
will be most effective for their target consumers (Keech,
Morrin, and Podoshen 2020).
Our ﬁndings also suggest that it is important to segment con-
sumers based on their global–local identity and apply different
strategies to different segments. Based on our research, market-
ers of access-based services should identify individuals who
have an accessible global identity as target consumers. There
are mainly three ways to measure global–local identity: (1)
scales can be used to assess consumers’ global–local identity,
such as the ones we used in Studies 2a–5, and the chronic
global–local identity measure in Study 6 (Web Appendix C);
(2) geographic locations can also be used to assess global–
local identity, with residents of metropolitan areas being more
likely high in global identity and those in rural areas being
more likely high in local identity (Wang, Kirmani, and Li
2021; Yang et al. 2019); and (3) Globalization Index scores
(Studies 1a and 1b) can be used as a proxy measure of
global–local identity among consumers across different coun-
tries, as suggested by previous research (Gao, Zhang, and
Mittal 2017).
Our ﬁndings also provide useful guidelines for global mar-
keting strategies. For example, when marketers expand to
global markets, they can provide more access-based options
in countries that have higher levels of global identity. In
these countries, consumers have high consumption openness
that leads them to naturally prefer access-based consumption.
It is not necessary for marketers to allocate signiﬁcant funds to
educate these consumers about the beneﬁts of access-based
programs. However, when marketers enter countries that are
high in local identity, they need to be aware that consumers
in these countries may not have an established acceptance of
access-based consumption. Therefore, it may be necessary
for marketers to exert additional effort and budget to activate
consumers’ consumption openness to enhance their accep-
tance of access-based programs.
Limitations and Future Research Directions
There are some potential limitations of this research. First, we
primarily focus on access-based consumption (Bardhi and
Eckhardt 2012; Lamberton and Rose 2012) in the current
research. Given that access-based consumption is a broad
construct that also involves other domains not examined in
this research, such as peer-to-peer sharing (Eckhardt et al.
2019), future scholars could test our theory in other access-
based domains. Second, Bardhi and Eckhardt (2017) intro-
duced a new dimension of the sharing economy: liquid con-
sumption,
which
is
characterized
as
ephemeral,
access-based, and dematerialized. This research focuses
mainly on the ﬁrst two characteristics (i.e., ephemerality
and access-based). It may be fruitful for future scholars to
examine how our theory applies to the dematerialized
aspect of liquid consumption. Third, we focus on the link
from global–local identity to preference for access-based con-
sumption, with consumption openness as a bridge between
consumer identity and product preferences. However, the
second item in our consumption openness scale (i.e., “Right
now, having access to different products and services is valu-
able to me”) might be too close to preference for access-based
consumption. Although we found that the mediation still
works when only the ﬁrst item (which is not closely related
to access-based consumption) is used (see Web Appendix
S), future researchers could develop better measures for the
consumption openness construct. Finally, we examined
several moderators in this research. Future scholars might
explore other moderators related to consumption openness,
such as connectedness between the future and current self,
to enrich our framework.
570
Journal of Marketing Research 59(3)

Appendix A. Review of Relevant Literature on Preference for Access-Based Consumption.
Research
Independent Variable
Mediator
Moderator
Dependent
Variable
Findings
A: Beneﬁt/Cost Factors
Claudy, Garcia,
and O’Driscoll
(2014)a
Financial beneﬁts, convenience, ﬂexibility,
safety, availability, values
Attitude toward car
sharing
N.A.
Adoption intention
for car sharing
services
The study identiﬁed reasons for and against
car sharing service.
Edbring, Lehner,
and Mont (2016)
Motivations (ﬂexibility, economic reasons,
temporality, sustainability),
obstacles (desire to own, concern for
hygiene, unfamiliarity, sustainability)
N.A.
N.A.
Engagement in sharing
consumption
Identify consumer motivations and barriers
relating to the access-based consumption.
Habibi, Kim, and
Laroche (2016)
Technical costs, search costs, sustainability,
materialism, transaction utility
N.A.
N.A.
Likelihood to choose
the sharing service
Technical costs, search costs, sustainability,
and materialism →increases the
likelihood of choosing the car rental
program. Transaction utility →decreases
the likelihood of choosing the car rental
service.
Hamari, Sjöklint,
and Ukkonen
(2016)
Sustainability, enjoyment, economic
beneﬁts
Attitude
N.A.
Behavioral intention
on sharing
Sustainability →attitude →behavioral
intention for sharing; consumer
enjoyments →behavioral intention for
sharing. Economic beneﬁts →behavioral
intention for sharing.
Mattia, Mugion,
and Principato
(2019)a
Sustainability, social aspects, economic
beneﬁts, subjective norms, perceived
behavioral control
Attitude toward car
sharing
N.A.
Intention to use a
car-sharing service
Consumer economic, environmental, and
social beneﬁts →attitude toward car
sharing; attitude, perceived behavioral
control, subjective norm →future
intention for reuse.
Moeller and
Wittkowski
(2010)
Trend orientation, convenience
orientation, possession importance
N.A.
N.A.
Preference for renting
Trend orientation, convenient orientation
→renting; possession importance →
ownership.
Oyedele and
Simpson (2018)a
Emerging adulthood, transaction utility,
ﬂexibility utility, shareaids, social utility,
familiarity, and trust
Flexibility utility,
shareaids, social
utility
N.A.
Intention to use a
sharing service
Flexibility utility →intention to use sharing
consumption. The emerging adulthood
life-stage transaction utility/shareaids →
intention to use sharing consumption.
B: Consumer Experience/Perception
Atasoy and
Morewedge
(2018)a
Product type (digital vs. physical),
acquisition mode (rental vs. purchase)
Psychological
ownership
N.A.
Willingness to pay
Consumers are willing to pay more to
purchase a physical product than a digital
product, but they are not willing to pay
more to rent a physical product than a
digital product.
Bagga, Bendle, and
Cotte (2019)a
Previous rental/purchase experiences
Psychological
ownership
N.A.
Willingness to pay
Consumers have a higher valuation for
purchased product than for rental
product.
Bolton and Alba
(2012)a
Past purchase type (purchase, rental, trial)
Perception on unused
utility of products
Present purchase type
(purchase, rental, trial)
Likelihood to rent
versus purchase
When purchasing on a later occasion
followed by past purchase of a good,
consumers are more willing to rerent
than repurchase the product.
(continued)
571

Appendix A. (continued)
Research
Independent Variable
Mediator
Moderator
Dependent
Variable
Findings
Hazée, Delcourt,
and Van
Vaerenbergh
(2017)
Barriers (complexity, reliability,
contamination, responsibility,
compatibility, image barriers)
N.A.
Attenuate barriers
(distance, manage,
elaborate, control,
relate)
Rejection of
access-based
services
Complexity, reliability, contamination,
responsibility, compatibility, and image
barriers →decrease adoption and usage
of access-based service. Customers can
engage in different practices to attenuate
perceived barriers and create values (to
distance, manage, elaborate, control, and
relate).
Knox and
Eliashberg
(2009)a
Expected future viewings
N.A.
Consumer segmentation
Rental versus
purchase
transactions
Expected future viewing reduces rental.
Lamberton and
Rose (2012)
Consumer’s usage (personal usage
predictability, and personal absolute
usage)
Perceived risk of
product scarcity
Partners’ demand on
shared product (over
others’ usage,
anticipated usage
similarity)
Likelihood to choose
sharing program
Beyond cost-related beneﬁts of sharing, the
perceived risk of scarcity related to
sharing is a central determinant of its
attractiveness.
Lee and Chow
(2020)a
Relative advantage; compatibility,
psychological ownership ecological
importance, social norms of sharing
Attitude toward
online fashion
renting
N.A.
Behavior intention
toward online
fashion renting
Consumer intention to rent fashion items
is inﬂuenced by their attitudes toward the
practice as well as by subjective norms.
Nguyen, Alaoui,
and Llosa
(2020)a
Interchangeability between the roles of
consumer and producer
Perceived social
proximity →trust
N.A.
Participation intention
Interchangeability →perceived social
proximity →trust →intention in
peer-to-peer rental
Pocheptsova,
Kivetz, and Dhar
(2008)a
Duration of choice consumption
Evaluation criteria,
duration of
consumption
Spending concept
Rental versus
purchase intentions
When facing a rental versus purchase
decision, consumers pay more attention
to the duration of consumption, thus
reducing rental intention.
C: Individual Difference Factors
Aspara and
Wittkowski
(2019)
Intelligence scores
Psychological
predispositions
related to social
exchanges
N.A.
Choice of access
modes
Consumers’ intelligence scores →social
trust →positive effect on choice of
access modes. Financial standing and
tendency to seek savings.
Davidson, Habibi,
and Laroche
(2018)
Materialism
Transformation
expectations,
perceived utility
N.A.
Willingness to
participate in
sharing-based
program
Consumer materialism →transformation
expectations (Americans)/perceived
utility (Indians) →participation in sharing.
Gupta et al.
(2019)a
Cultural values, product category
N.A.
N.A.
Intention to rent out
and rent products in
peer-to-peer
exchanges
Collectivism/masculinism →positive effect
on intention to rent out/rent; uncertainty
avoidance →negative effect on intention
to rent out/rent. Product category
signiﬁcantly affects renting out and
renting intentions of individuals using
peer-to-peer exchanges.
(continued)
572

Appendix A. (continued)
Research
Independent Variable
Mediator
Moderator
Dependent
Variable
Findings
Hellwig et al.
(2015)a
Clusters of consumers (sharing idealists,
sharing opponents, sharing pragmatist,
and sharing norms)
N.A.
N.A.
Willingness to share
This research identiﬁed a set of
trait-related, motivational, perceived
socioeconomic, and behavioral variables
that can be used to differentiate between
clusters of sharing types and willingness
to share speciﬁc categories of objects.
Lang and
Armstrong
(2018)a
Fashion leadership; need for uniqueness,
materialism
Subjective norms,
past sustainable
behavior
N.A.
Clothing renting
Three personality traits (fashion leadership,
need for uniqueness, and materialism)
signiﬁcantly inﬂuence consumer intention
to rent clothing.
Lawson et al.
(2016)a
Clusters of consumers (Fickle Floaters,
Premium Keepers, Conscious
Materialists, and Change Seekers)
N.A.
N.A.
Attitude toward
access-based
consumption and
purchase intention
This research identiﬁes factors that impact
consumers’ willingness to access product
through socially networked short-term
rentals by segmenting consumers with
varying dispositions toward access-based
consumption.
Liu and Mattila
(2017)
Advertising appeal (belongingness vs.
uniqueness), sense of power (low vs.
high)
Self–brand
connection
N.A.
Click-through
intention and
purchase intention
Powerless individuals respond more
favorably to the belongingness appeal,
whereas powerful people react more
positively to the uniqueness appeal.
Ozanne and
Ballantine
(2010)a
Clusters of consumers (Socialites, Market
Avoiders, Quiet Anti-Consumers, and
Passive Members)
N.A.
N.A.
Participate in sharing
(toy library)
Socialites enjoy the social beneﬁts of
participation in sharing. Market Avoiders
→perceived social and community
beneﬁts →sharing; Quiet
Anti-Consumers feel a sense of belonging
to sharing and hold strong
anticonsumption frugality and sharing
values. Passive Members are not socially
involved, nor do they hold strong
anticonsumption values.
Pantano and Stylos
(2020)a
Need to wear new clothes for a special
event, inspirations created by the
products, new way of consuming luxury
goods, need to make more sustainable
choices, increase the life cycle of luxury
product
N.A.
N.A.
Preference between
rental versus
purchase of luxury
apparel
Consumers’ increased willingness to show
their social status through renting rather
than owning luxurious apparel based on
ﬁve main motivators: need to wear new
clothes for special events; inspirations
created by the products/brands;
possibility to explore a new way of
consuming luxury goods; make more
sustainable choices; increase the life cycle
of luxury product).
(continued)
573

Appendix A. (continued)
Research
Independent Variable
Mediator
Moderator
Dependent
Variable
Findings
D: Consumer Identity
Bardhi and
Eckhardt (2012)
The nature of access-based consumption
N.A.
N.A.
Car-sharing
perceptions
Consumers do not feel identiﬁcation with
access/shared car. Instrumental utility is
more important than social utility.
Negative reciprocity is the norm among
users. No feelings of communal links
present among the users.
Bardhi, Eckhardt,
and Arnould
(2012)
Contemporary global nomads
N.A.
N.A.
Liquid relationship to
possessions
Global nomadism consumers tend to form
situational attachments to objects,
appreciate objects primarily for their
instrumental use-value, and value
immaterial or light possessions as well as
consumption practices.
Weiss (2017)
Identity centrality
Low possession
substitutability
Whether identity is
product-centric
Choice between
rental and purchase
Centrality of identity decreases rental by
rendering a possession more “me.”
The current
research
Global identity versus local identity
Consumption
openness
Desire for openness,
traveler/settler
orientation
Preference for
access-based
consumption
People high in global (vs. local) identity are
high in consumption openness, which in
turn enhances their preference for
access-based consumption. Consumers’
desire for openness and traveler–settler
orientation are boundaries for the
relationship between global–local identity
and preference for access-based
consumption.
aThe bibliographic information for these citations is listed in Web Appendix T.
Notes: N.A. = not applicable.
574

Appendix B. Measures Used in This Article.
Constructs
Study
Measures
Identity manipulation check (Zhang and
Khare 2009)
2a, 2b, 3, 4, 5, 7,
8, 9, 10
1. For the time being, I mainly identify myself as a ____.
2. At this moment, I feel I am a ____.
3. On top of my mind right now are thoughts of being a ____.
(1 = “global citizen,” and 7 = “local citizen”)
Chronic local–global identity measure
(Tu, Khare and Zhang 2012)a
6
1. I identify that I am a local citizen.
2. I care about knowing local events.
3. My heart mostly belongs to my local community.
4. I respect my local traditions.
1. I identify that I am a global citizen.
2. I care about knowing global events.
3. I believe people should be made more aware of how connected we are to the
rest of the world.
4. My heart mostly belongs to the whole world.
Willingness to use access-based
programsb
2b, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10
1. How likely are you willing to participate in a ____ sharing program?
2. How likely are you willing to share your ____ with others?
(“bike” in Studies 2B and 8; “camping tent” in Studies 3, 4 and 10; “car” in Study 9;
1 = “very unlikely,” and 7 = “very likely”)
Adoption intention (Ma, Yang, and
Mourali 2014)
2b
1. How likely are you to rent [purchase] the bike from the store? (1 = “very
unlikely,” and 7 = “very likely”)
2. How seriously would you consider renting [purchasing] the bike from the store?
(1 = “not at all serious,” and 7 = “very serious”)
3. How interested are you in renting [purchasing] the bike from the store? (1 = “not
at all interested,” and 7 = “very interested”)
Consumption opennessab
2a, 2b, 3, 4,
5, 8, 9
1. At present, I am open to diversiﬁed products and services.
2. Right now, having access to different products and services is valuable to me.
3. At present, I enjoy being offered a wide range of products and services.
Perceived responsibility to environment
(Ng and Basu 2019)a
2a
1. I think protecting the environment is my responsibility.
2. I think environmental deterioration is a personally relevant issue for me.
Prevention focus (Lockwood, Jordan,
and Kunda 2002)a
2b
1. In general, I am focused on preventing negative events in my life.
2. I am anxious that I will fall short of my responsibilities and obligations.
3. I often think about the person I am afraid I might become in the future.
4. I often worry that I will fail to accomplish my academic goals.
5. I often imagine myself experiencing bad things that I fear might happen to me.
6. I frequently think about how I can prevent failures in my life.
7. I am more oriented toward preventing losses than I am toward achieving gains.
8. My major goal in school right now is to avoid becoming an academic failure.
9. I see myself as someone who is primarily striving to become the self I “ought” to
be—to fulﬁll my duties, responsibilities, and obligations.
Consideration of opportunity costs
(Spiller 2011)a
8
1. I often think about the fact that spending money on one purchase now means not
spending money on some other purchase.
2. When I’m faced with an opportunity to make a purchase, I try to imagine things in
other categories I might spend that money on.
3. I often consider other speciﬁc items that I would not be able to buy if I made a
particular purchase.
Traveler orientationab
4
1. At this moment, I feel that I belong to a traveler community.
2. At the time being, I identify myself as a traveler.
3. I try to think as a traveler as of now.
4. At this moment, I hold a traveler’s viewpoint.
5. On top of my mind right now, I try to understand a traveler’s perspective.
Settler orientationab
4
1. At the time being, I feel that I belong to the settler community.
2. I feel that I identify myself as a settler at the moment.
3. I try to think as a settler as of now.
4. On the top of my head now, I hold a settler’s viewpoint.
5. At this moment, I try to understand a settler’s perspective.
Notes: aThese scales are anchored at 1 = “strongly disagree,” and 7 = “strongly agree.”
bThese scales were developed by the authors.
Nie et al.
575

Associate Editor
Rui (Juliet) Zhu
Declaration of Conﬂicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conﬂicts of interest with respect to
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no ﬁnancial support for the research, authorship
and/or publication of this article.
References
Arnett, Jeffrey Jensen (2002), “The Psychology of Globalization,”
American Psychologist, 57 (10), 774–83.
Aspara, Jaakko and Kristina Wittkowski (2019), “Sharing-Dominant
Logic?
Quantifying
the
Association
Between
Consumer
Intelligence and Choice of Social Access Modes,” Journal of
Consumer Research, 46 (2), 201–22.
Bardhi, Fleura and Giana M. Eckhardt (2012), “Access-Based
Consumption: The Case of Car Sharing,” Journal of Consumer
Research, 39 (4), 881–98.
Bardhi, Fleura and Giana M. Eckhardt (2017), “Liquid Consumption,”
Journal of Consumer Research, 44 (3), 582–97.
Bardhi, Fleura, Giana M. Eckhardt, and Eric J. Arnould (2012),
“Liquid Relationship to Possessions,” Journal of Consumer
Research, 39 (3), 510–29.
Belk, Russell (2010), “Sharing,” Journal of Consumer Research, 36
(5), 715–34.
Brewer, Marilynn B. (1991), “The Social Self: On Being the Same and
Different at the Same Time,” Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 17 (5), 475–82.
Buchtel,
Emma
E.
(2014),
“Cultural
Sensitivity
or
Cultural
Stereotyping? Positive
and Negative
Effects
of a
Cultural
Psychology
Class,”
International
Journal
of
Intercultural
Relations, 39 (2014), 40–52.
Chen, Yu (2009), “Possession and Access: Consumer Desires and
Value Perceptions Regarding Contemporary Art Collection and
Exhibit Visits,” Journal of Consumer Research, 35 (6), 925–40.
Chiu, Chi-Yue, Peter Gries, Carlos J. Torelli, and Shirley Y.Y. Cheng
(2011), “Toward a Social Psychology of Globalization,” Journal of
Social Issues, 67 (4), 666–76.
Davidson, Alexander, Mohammed Reza Habibi, and Michel Laroche
(2018), “Materialism and the Sharing Economy: A Cross-Cultural
Study of American and Indian Consumers,” Journal of Business
Research, 82 (January), 364–72.
Eckhardt, Giana M., Mark B. Houston, Baojun Jiang, Cait Lamberton,
Aric Rindﬂeisch, and Georgios Zervas (2019), “Marketing in the
Sharing Economy,” Journal of Marketing, 83 (5), 5–27.
Edbring, Emma Gullstrand, Matthias Lehner, and Oksana Mont
(2016), “Exploring Consumer Attitudes to Alternative Models of
Consumption: Motivations and Barriers,” Journal of Cleaner
Production, 123 (2016), 5–15.
Erez, Miriam, Alon Lisak, Raveh Harush, Ella Glikson, Rikki Nouri,
and
Efrat
Shokef
(2013),
“Going
Global:
Developing
Management Students’ Cultural Intelligence and Global Identity
in Culturally Diverse Virtual Teams,” Academy of Management
Learning & Education, 12 (3), 330–55.
Gao, Huachao, Vikas Mittal, and Yinlong Zhang (2020), “The Differential
Effect of Local-Global Identity Among Males and Females: The Case
of Price Sensitivity,” Journal of Marketing Research, 57 (1), 173–91.
Gao, Huachao, Yinlong Zhang, and Vikas Mittal (2017), “How Does
Local-Global Identity Affect Price Sensitivity?” Journal of
Marketing, 81 (3), 62–79.
Habibi, Mohammad Reza, Andrea Kim, and Michel Laroche (2016),
“From Sharing to Exchange: An Extended Framework of Dual
Modes of Collaborative Nonownership Consumption,” Journal of
the Association for Consumer Research, 1 (2), 277–94.
Hamari, Juho, Mimmi Sjöklint, and Antti Ukkonen (2016), “The
Sharing Economy: Why People Participate in Collaborative
Appendix C: Product Stimuli used in Studies 2a, 3, 4, and 10
Option A: Accessed Option
Option B: Purchase Option
576
Journal of Marketing Research 59(3)

Consumption,” Journal of the Association for Information Science
and Technology, 67 (9), 2047–59.
Hayes, Andrew F. (2017), An Introduction to Mediation, Moderation,
and Conditional Process Analysis: A Regression-Based Approach.
New York: Guilford Publications.
Hazée, Simon, Cecile Delcourt, and Yves Van Vaerenbergh (2017),
“Burdens of Access, Understanding Customer Barriers and
Barrier-Attenuating Practices in Access-Based Services,” Journal
of Service Research, 20 (4), 441–56.
Hsee, Christopher K. (1996), “The Evaluability Hypothesis: An
Explanation for Preference Reversals Between Joint and Separate
Evaluations
of
Alternatives,”
Organizational
Behavior
and
Human Decision Processes, 67 (3), 247–57.
Keech, Jessica, Maureen Morrin, and Jeffrey Steven Podoshen (2020),
“The
Effects
of
Materialism
on
Consumer
Evaluation
of
Sustainable
Synthetic
(Lab-Grown)
Products,”
Journal
of
Consumer Marketing, 37 (5), 579–90.
Kim,
Heejung
S.
and
Aimee
Drolet
(2003),
“Choice
and
Self-Expression:
A
Cultural
Analysis
of
Variety-Seeking,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85 (2), 373.
Lamberton, Cait and Randall L. Rose (2012), “When Is Ours Better Than
Mine? A Framework for Understanding and Altering Participation in
Commercial Sharing Systems,” Journal of Marketing, 76 (4), 109–25.
Leung, Angela Ka-yee and Chi-yue Chiu (2010), “Multicultural
Experience, Idea Receptiveness, and Creativity,” Journal of
Cross-Cultural Psychology, 41 (5–6), 723–41.
Liu, Stephanie Q. and Anna S. Mattila (2017), “Airbnb: Online Targeted
Advertising,
Sense
of
Power,
and
Consumer
Decisions,”
International Journal of Hospitality Management, 60 (2017), 33–41.
Lockwood, Penelope, Christian H. Jordan, and Ziva Kunda (2002),
“Motivation by Positive or Negative Role Models: Regulatory
Focus Determines Who Will Best Inspire Us,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83 (4), 854–64.
Ma, Zhenfeng, Zhiyong Yang, and Mehdi Mourali (2014), “Consumer
Adoption of New Products: Independent Versus Interdependent
Self-Perspectives,” Journal of Marketing, 78 (2), 101–17.
Merriam-Webster (2018a), “Settler,” (February 1), https://www.
merriam-webster.com/dictionary/settler.
Merriam-Webster (2018b), “Traveler,” (February 1), https://www.
merriam-webster.com/dictionary/traveler.
Mitchell, Amy, Katie Simmons, Katerina Eva Matsa, and Laura Silver
(2018), “Publics Around the World Follow National and Local
News More Closely Than International,” Pew Research Center
(January 11), https://www.pewresearch.org/global/2018/01/11/publics-
around-the-world-follow-national-and-local-news-more-closely-than-
international/.
Moeller, Sabine and Kiristina Wittkowski (2010), “The Burdens of
Ownership: Reasons for Preferring Renting,” Managing Service
Quality, 20 (2), 176–91.
Ng, Sharon and Shankha Basu (2019), “Global Identity and Preference
for Environmentally Friendly Products: The Role of Personal
Responsibility,” Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 50 (8), 919–36.
Ng, Sharon and Rajeev Batra (2017), “Regulatory Goals in a Globalized
World,” Journal of Consumer Psychology, 27 (2), 270–77.
Ng, Sharon, Ali Faraji-Rad, and Rajeev Batra (2021), “Uncertainty
Evokes Consumers’ Preference for Brands Incongruent with
Their Global-Local Citizenship Identity,” Journal of Marketing
Research, 58 (2), 400–415.
Nijssen,
Edwin
J.
and
Susan
P.
Douglas
(2011),
“Consumer
World-Mindedness and Attitudes Toward Product Positioning in
Advertising: An Examination of Global Versus Foreign Versus Local
Positioning,” Journal of International Marketing, 19 (3), 113–33.
Oishi, Shigehiro (2010), “The Psychology of Residential Mobility:
Implications for the Self, Social Relationships, and Well-Being,”
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5 (1), 5–21.
Oishi, Shigehiro, Selin Kesebir, Felicity F. Miao, Thomas Talhelm,
Yumi Endo, Yukiko Uchida, et al. (2013), “Residential Mobility
Increases Motivation to Expand Social Network: But Why?”
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 49 (2), 217–23.
Oishi, Shigehiro, Alexander J. Rothman, Mark Snyder, Jenny Su, Keri Zehm,
Andrew E. Hertel, et al. (2007), “The Socioecological Model of
Procommunity Action: The Beneﬁts of Residential Stability,” Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 93 (5), 831–44.
Osztovits,
Ádám,
Árpád
Kő szegi,
Bence
Nagy,
and
Bence Damjanovics (2015), “Sharing or Paring? Growth of the
Sharing Economy,” PwC (October 9), https://www.pwc.com/hu/
en/kiadvanyok/assets/pdf/sharing-economy-en.pdf.
Rieﬂer, Petra, Adamantios Diamantopoulos, and Judy A. Siguaw (2012),
“Cosmopolitan Consumer as a Target Group for Segmentation,”
Journal of International Business Studies, 43 (3), 285–305.
Ritzer, George and Nathan Jurgenson (2010), “Production, Consumption,
Prosumption: The Nature of Capitalism in the Age of the Digital
‘Prosumer’,” Journal of Consumer Culture, 10 (1), 13–36.
Spencer, Steven J., Mark P. Zanna, and Geoffrey T. Fong (2005),
“Establishing a Causal Chain: Why Experiments Are Often More
Effective Than Mediational Analyses in Examining Psychological
Processes,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89 (6), 845–51.
Spiller, Stephen A. (2011), “Opportunity Cost Consideration,” Journal
of Consumer Research, 38 (4), 595–610.
Steenkamp, Jan-Benedict E.M., and Martijn G. De Jong (2010), “A Global
Investigation into the Constellation of Consumer Attitudes Toward
Global and Local Products,” Journal of Marketing, 74 (6), 18–40.
Trading Economics (2018), “Home Ownership Rate,” (February 1),
https://tradingeconomics.com/country-list/home-ownership-rate
Tu, Lingjiang, Adwait Khare, and Yinlong Zhang (2012), “A Short
8-Item Scale for Measuring Consumers’ Local-Global Identity,”
International Journal of Research in Marketing, 29 (1), 35–42.
Wang, Yajin, Amna Kirmani, and Xiaolin Li (2021), “Not Too Far to
Help: Residential Mobility, Global Identity, and Donations to
Distant Beneﬁciaries,” Journal of Consumer Research, 47 (6), 878–89.
Weiss, Liad (2017), “Possession Substitutability: Identity and Usage
of Rented (Versus Owned) Products,” in Advances in Consumer
Research, Vol. 45, Ayelet Gneezy, Vladas Griskevicius, and
Patti Williams, eds. Duluth, MN: Association for Consumer
Research, 957–58.
Yang, Zhiyong, Sijie Sun, Ashok K. Lalwani, and Narayan Janakiraman
(2019), “How Does Consumers’ Local or Global Identity Inﬂuence
Price–Perceived Quality Associations? The Role of Perceived
Quality Variance,” Journal of Marketing, 83 (3), 145–62.
Zhang, Yinlong and Adwait Khare (2009), “The Impact of Accessible
Identities on the Evaluation of Global Versus Local Products,”
Journal of Consumer Research, 36 (3), 524–37.
Nie et al.
577