Asian Geographer
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rage20
Railway ﬆation, The Image of the City, and transit-
oriented development: an appraisal of the cognitive value
of transit hubs
Iman Banerjee
To cite this article: Iman Banerjee (2025) Railway station, The Image of the City, and transit-
oriented development: an appraisal of the cognitive value of transit hubs, Asian Geographer,
42:1, 1-21, DOI: 10.1080/10225706.2023.2288351
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/10225706.2023.2288351
Published online: 29 Nov 2023.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 319
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rage20

Railway station, The Image of the City, and transit-oriented 
development: an appraisal of the cognitive value of transit 
hubs
Iman Banerjee
Department of Geography, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India
ABSTRACT  
A train station may be seen as an anecdote about the history and 
evolution of a city, a system of interaction between human 
groups, a space for the production and provision of services, a 
place of collective consumption and linked decisions, an arena of 
physical vigor, or a field of conflict. What draws the attention of 
this study toward train stations is the shifting interest of urban 
policymakers and governance authorities from automobile- 
dependent unsustainable cities towards public transit-oriented 
sustainable cities. Therefore, academic attention needs to be paid 
to the cognitive characteristics of train stations and the 
implication of those characteristics on the practices that consider 
stations as an inevitable ingredient of urban development. This 
research addresses the intuitive question of how train stations, 
the cognitive value associated with them, and the importance of 
this value as obligatory constituents of decisions can affect urban 
policy formulation and allocation of resources. The present 
endeavor is grounded on the objective of making a general 
theoretical argument about the relevance and responsiveness of 
train stations to the history and functioning of urban places, the 
consequent human cognitive value attached to them and the 
possible role of this value in a specific set of actions, i.e. rail- 
based transit-oriented development. This objective guided the 
fundamental argument of this research: the cognitive importance 
of railway stations as identity-makers of urban landscape must be 
acknowledged 
by 
the 
contemporary 
urban 
development 
practices that consider train stations as catalysts of socially 
inclusive, economically viable and environmentally sustainable 
urban development.
ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 24 June 2022 
Accepted 9 November 2023  
KEYWORDS  
The Image of the City; 
imageability; legibility; 
transit-oriented 
development; India
1. Introduction
Urban places on no account can be conceptualized as static entities; rather, they are 
the manifestations of continuous creation and recreation of functional spaces by 
mankind over time. They are the conglomerations of man-made artefacts, depicting 
a network of interaction between people (humans) and places (environment) and 
their mutability. Man-made artefacts, as Norberg-Schulz (1980) argues, are not 
© 2023 Hong Kong Geographical Association 
CONTACT  Iman Banerjee 
imanbanerjee64@gmail.com
Department of Geography, Banaras Hindu University, 
Varanasi 221005, India
ASIAN GEOGRAPHER 
2025, VOL. 42, NO. 1, 1–21 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10225706.2023.2288351

superficial practical establishments or consequences of some discrete and erratic 
events; rather, they pose their own organized structures, and those structures do 
create some meanings. Hence, we can infer that the forethoughts behind the origin 
and evolution of urban places are not only to survive but also to fasten some 
definite meanings to that survival. If cities are developed by and for people, then 
the main raw material of the city can be considered to be human beings (Sak  
2008). In other words, human perception and needs created the cities and their 
built-up areas. Cities, with their buildings and spaces, tend to furnish people’s identity 
and cognition, which in turn construct or re-construct urban spaces for human inter­
action. Since the mid-twentieth century, a number of urban theories, popularly 
known as the theories in spatial cognition and behavioral geography, have devoted 
themselves to recognize this people-space relationship from the perspective of indi­
vidual perceivers of urban space and their capabilities to recall the features that 
they have perceived (Filomena, Verstegen, and Manley 2019).
In 1960, Kevin Lynch, probably for the very first time, re-interpreted the idea of city 
design and usability of the whole urban space from the perspective of people as the per­
ceivers and determiners of urban space in his seminal book The Image of the City (Lynch  
1960). Lynch devoted his work to assimilating people’s perceptions in the representation 
of a city and spelt out in detail various external images of people pertaining to their city. 
Analysing the urban forms of Los Angeles, Boston and Jersey City, the author discerned 
that the mental image of individuals could be superimposed to construct a community 
cognitive map (Filomena, Verstegen, and Manley 2019). The cognitive image conciliates 
in the correspondence of people and their environment: “The environment suggests dis­
tinctions and relations, and the observer with great adaptability and in the light of his 
own purposes selects, organizes and endows with meaning what he sees” (Lynch 1960, 
6). The consequent urban structure is conceptualized as a combination of five structural 
elements – paths, edges, districts, nodes and landmarks – which are discussed in detail in 
the subsequent sections. Since the 1970s, these five elements have largely comprised the 
nucleus of spatial cognition theories, constructing the spatial knowledge organization in 
the path, landmark and configurational understanding (Filomena, Verstegen, and 
Manley 2019; Siegel and White 1975). However, it is utterly difficult to analyse this com­
plicated network of people and space in all the details in a single study. Then, a focal point 
becomes necessary, and this research focuses on the railway station as an element of 
urban image.
Railway stations have long stood as testimonies of urban living, but historically their 
role as places to pass through was far more recognized compared to their role as places to 
live or socialize. However, this conventional role of train stations as mere transport build­
ings has been gradually altered over the last quarter of the twentieth century, and now 
railway stations are ceased to be considered as mere transport buildings. Train stations 
are emerging as crucial pieces of urban structure, through which the formation of spati­
ality and social structuring within a city can be traced (Sak 2008). With the progress of 
the twenty-first century, several issues like rapidly growing population, seemingly relent­
less urbanization, an alarming rate of vehicle emission and the consequent pollution 
emphasized railway stations as critical places with great potential for infrastructure devel­
opment for the optimized functioning of urban centers (Banerjee and Saha 2022). What 
draws the attention of this study toward train stations is the shifting interest of urban 
2 
I. BANERJEE

policymakers and governance authorities from automobile-dependent unsustainable 
cities towards public transit-oriented sustainable cities.
The study examines rail-based Transit-Oriented Development (TOD), one of the 
dominant contemporary spatial planning approaches for urban areas which seeks 
to accommodate diversified urban activities around key transit stations. It stresses 
that the nature and functionality of transit stations must have a direct bearing on 
the transit-oriented urban design as well as the lives of transit users. One such 
nature of transit stations is associated with their uniqueness and capabilities to 
shape the urban image: they visibly determine the public perception of the entire 
city and its individual parts and influence the behavior of urban development 
actors (Cheng et al. 2013; Gnatiuk, Kononenko, and Mezentsev 2022). Moreover, 
there is a sound number of rationales to consider a train station as an identity 
maker of urban landscape and one quite special among other physical elements of 
a city. These rationales are discussed in detail in the subsequent sections from a 
theoretical perspective.
This study, furthermore, refers to the examples of railway stations in India to facili­
tate as well as validate the concerned theoretical discussions. India is a country with 
more than 150 years of railway history, where railways, in terms of their location, 
functionality and physical spread, were (and still are) largely dissimilar from other 
forms of colonial undertakings, like mines, plantations or manufacturing industries; 
they have a pan-India presence (Jagga 2013). In addition, rail-based TOD is continu­
ously gaining momentum in contemporary urban development policies of India, a 
country with more than 377 million urban population (Banerjee 2021; NIUA  
2016). The long history of railways in India, the wide acceptance of railway 
medium among Indian citizens belonging from all economic strata and the increasing 
importance of railway as a catalyst of sustainable urban development in the national 
and regional development plans (Hariharan 2017; NIUA 2016), are some of the key 
features that make Indian railway stations worthy enough to facilitate the principal 
theoretical argument of this paper: railway station as a piece of architecture as well 
as a place of social interest has largely contributed to the formation of the image of 
a city.
The present paper is organized into six sections. After this introduction, Section 2 of 
the paper is grounded on a brief discussion of the prevailing knowledge gap in the sphere 
of rail-based TOD research and seeks to highlight the paper’s own contribution to partly 
fill that gap. In order to do so, this research specifically addresses the technocentricity of 
the TOD literature and its consequent lack of knowledge on the symbolic characteristics 
of train stations and their role in producing historically grounded and socially inclusive 
urban spaces. In other words, this research specifically addresses the silence of cognitive 
value of railway stations in the academic literature concerning TOD. Following this, 
Section 3 provides an account of the methodology adopted for this study. In Section 4, 
different dimensions of city image and the influence of train stations over these dimen­
sions are discussed from a variety of perspectives. The cognitive dimension. Sub­
sequently, Section 5 argues for the consideration of the cognitive value of train 
stations in rail-based TOD ventures and draws some potential pathways to do so. 
Finally, the paper concludes with remarks on some potent research questions that may 
interest researchers as well as TOD planners in the days to come.
ASIAN GEOGRAPHER 
3

2. Research gaps in TOD studies and contributions of the study
Since the inception of TOD, the proliferation of transit sites has been the key area of 
concern for research and practice in geography, economics and urban planning. While 
the intention of TOD was to direct urban expansion towards public transit in order to 
reduce heavy automobile dependency, economic utilization of station and surrounding 
space has quickly become the chief driving factor (Bernick and Cervero 1998; Moham­
mad et al. 2013). Social qualities of station districts, i.e. the capability of station areas 
to support a better quality of life for urbanites through providing inclusive social and cul­
tural spaces, has become a component of concern for TOD planning only over the last 
two decades (Beckerich, Benoit-Bazin, and Delaplace 2017; Du, Druta, and van Wese­
mael 2021). Despite the increasing recognition of the importance of social qualities of 
station spaces in TOD research, scholars have shown substantial concern regarding 
the inclination of TOD research towards the physical design of urban fabric and econ­
omic profitability of station spaces, and the consequent negligence of social dimensions, 
especially of those which are invisible and intangible in nature (Ibraeva et al. 2020; Jacob­
son and Forsyth 2008). Furthermore, the cognitive value of a train station, though highly 
interrelated but partially different from its social value, did not draw substantial attention 
in TOD research.
There have been a few studies concerning the assessment of the quality of station 
spaces, where the role of station architecture, landmarks and legibility are emphasized 
as important assessment factors (Du et al. 2021; Duckworth-Smith and Babb 2015). 
This issue is well-evident from the thematic review of TOD literature by Du, Druta, 
and van Wesemael (2021), where the authors have only identified one such article 
emphasizing the role of train stations to portray the image of a city and contribute to 
the identity of urban landscape (see Table 5 of their review paper), despite a fair 
number of references from scholarly works on “Liveliness & comfort”, “Diversity of 
social activities”, “Sense of safety” and other socio-experiential aspects of TOD. Similar 
results can be seen from the meta-analysis of TOD literature by Ibraeva et al. (2020), 
where the authors observed the overwhelming representations of the themes like 
“travel behavior”, “real estate prices”, “residential location” and “urban form”, among 
others. In simple terms, what is visibly under-studied by TOD research is the cognitive 
qualities of a train station as a determinant of place quality, specifically the idea that 
station areas can be portrayed and perceived as representatives of urban places, furnish­
ing the creation of urban identity and producing an image of the city.
There has been a substantial number of attempts where train stations/districts are con­
sidered as nodes in transport network, points of access to trains and, increasingly, to 
other transportation modes, as well as places within urban landscape, representing 
specific sections of the city with a concentration of infrastructure but also with a diver­
sified collection of buildings and open spaces (Bertolini and Spit 1998, 9; Bertolini 1999; 
Reusser et al. 2008; Singh et al. 2014). But one would be hard-pressed to find out an 
attempt where train stations, including their neighborhoods, are compared with 
respect to their representativeness of the city where they are located. Urban development 
plans, either with the banner of TOD or simply as urban (re)development around rail 
transit hubs, largely seek to make station buildings economically profitable, physically 
beautiful and, recently, socially inclusive places (UIC 2019). Yet, there is a very limited 
4 
I. BANERJEE

number of attempts where the role of a train station as an interpreter of urban history in 
the context of train stations and offer theoretical support to encourage the incorporation 
of the ideas of The Image of the City in contemporary rail-based urban development ven­
tures, thereby making urban development policies more people-centric and inclusive. 
The influence of the Lynchian perspective on the theories of spatial cognition and its con­
tribution to the behavioral paradigm in geography remained largely unchallenged, even 
after its substantial modifications by subsequent studies. For instance, Kitchin (2014) uti­
lized digital mapping, wayfinding apps, and geolocation services to anchor such tools 
within the framework of Lynchian theory to contribute to the studies on urban naviga­
tion and perception. Similar attempts were made by Filomena, Verstegen, and Manley 
(2019), where the authors have tried to introduce a computational approach to The 
Image of the City by integrating the theory with geographic information science. There­
fore, the Lynchian perspective assigned a spatial dimension to the concept of environ­
mental cognition, which makes it worthy enough in the field of geographical enquiry 
(Filomena, Verstegen, and Manley 2019; Ishikawa 2018). Urban-centric cognitive 
research continued to progress in a variety of disciplines including human geography, 
where this trajectory of research, directly indebted to Lynch, emphasizes the association 
of cognitive processes and mental images with diverse subjects like urban design, acces­
sibility and travel behavior as well as the implication of travel experience on the creation 
of cognitive images (Mondschein and Moga 2018). Human geographers, influenced by 
the Lynchian perspective, considered cognitive maps as sources of varied information 
concerning urban socio-spatial phenomena at the local level and have endeavored to 
devise methods to produce spatial information from cognitive processes (Pinheiro 1998).
Concerning the key research subject of this paper, i.e. train stations, there has been a 
limited number of attempts to incorporate the Lynchian theory directly to understand 
and interpret the role of a train station in portraying the image of a city in an era of 
TOD. A sound volume of contemporary literature on TOD can be found, largely foster­
ing the role of railway stations in promoting urban regeneration or revitalization (e.g. 
Banerjee forthcoming; Banerjee and Saha 2022; Cervero, Guerra, and Al 2017; Chorus 
and Bertolini 2011; Joshi et al. 2017; Thomas and Bertolini 2020). Moreover, this 
paper examines the railway stations of India to illustrate the importance of train stations 
in portraying the image of their own cities and their commendable positions as the iden­
tity-makers of urban landscape. However, this is not an endeavor to discuss the techni­
calities of TOD or its role as an urban development tool in detail; rather, it is a conceptual 
attempt to re-discover the Lynchian perspective in the precise context of railway stations 
and rail-based TOD. It initiates an argument on how TOD planning and practice can line 
up with a cognitive-environmental fabric of train stations, where city designers and plan­
ners can promote the production of public spaces around transit systems and associated 
development patterns, which offer cognitively engaging alternatives to urbanites across 
all socio-economic levels and ages.
3. Methodology
Since the principal aim of the present study is to deconstruct the notion of city image in 
the context of train stations from a conceptual perspective, it is grounded on relevant the­
ories in the field and canvassed upon selected historical shreds of evidence from India. 
ASIAN GEOGRAPHER 
5

However, India is an example here, not a case. The conceptual discussion on different 
aspects of the cognitive value of train stations presented in the paper is grounded on a 
qualitative elucidation of selected scholarly evidence in the field. In view of the wide 
scope of research of this paper as well as the large and diversified nature of scholarly 
attempts in the field of TOD, this research followed a multi-step review, interpretation 
and synthesis methodology (Figure 1). The seminal work of Lynch (1960) was considered 
to be the starting point for the present endeavor, and its subsequent modifications and 
interpretations were also being consulted. Insights were gathered from scholarly works 
in different disciplines, mostly focusing on the urban landscape and its image formation. 
Additionally, the research consulted a vast body of literature, both theoretical and 
empirical, concerning the subject of TOD in a diverse range of countries.
The chief focus of the literature review remained concentrated mainly on research 
papers published in peer-reviewed international journals. The major themes considered 
in the literature search include “image of the city”, “human perception and urban plan­
ning”, “environmental image”, “station area planning” and “transit-oriented develop­
ment”, among others. Furthermore, in order to strengthen the argument on the 
cognitive importance of train stations, certain books, chapters from edited books, and 
policy drafts/reports are also consulted to enhance the insights gathered from peer- 
reviewed articles. Finally, the scholarly evidence is supplemented by the author’s own 
experience of the rail transport system in India as a whole and the production of 
space in station environments of India.
4. Conceptualizing the cognitive dimension of train stations
As argued in section 2, research on railway station redevelopment and rail-based TOD is 
largely inclined towards economic and physical aspects, and there is a lack of understand­
ing of the cognitive value of train stations that affects the interaction of people and spaces 
through controlling human experiences and perceptions. Therefore, two fundamental 
questions may arise: Why do railway stations matter as buildings in urban landscape? 
Is it only their roles as transport buildings and accessibility effects which attract other 
associated land uses, or do they have some other roles to play (except transportation) 
which make them worthy buildings where urban development plans can be 
Figure 1. Synoptic representation of the research methodology (Source: Author).
6 
I. BANERJEE

concentrated? One of the possible answers to both questions is that a fair number of 
studies have discussed the social advantages (however, not as popular as economic 
and physical advantages) of using a station building as a nucleus of urban development. 
These studies mostly confine themselves to the topics like social diversity, social inter­
action, safety, and vibrancy, among others. However, there is another dimension 
which makes a station worthy enough to be distinguished as a separate, sharp, identifi­
able, imaginable entity of a city, which has enough capacity to represent the city where it 
is placed. This is called the cognitive value of a train station, which substantially supports 
all the other values (economic, social and physical) of the station. Therefore, it is impera­
tive to make a cross-section of this cognitive value of train stations and identify the major 
aspects through which this cognitive value can be conceptualized.
4.1. Railway station and the elements of city image
Any given city seems to have a public image or a series of public images, which is a 
coalescence of several individual images. The fundamental elements of city images as 
asserted by Lynch (1960) can be reduced to five broad categories of artefacts: “paths, 
edges, districts, nodes and landmarks”, where “these elements may be of more general 
application, since they seem to reappear in many types of environmental images” (10).
The first element of city image, paths, are the channels of occasional, customary or 
potential movements of an observer (Lynch 1960, 10). They are the veins of a city as 
they guide people’s movement and support orientation (Filomena, Verstegen, and 
Manley 2019). Paths have a major role in image formation as people perceive any city 
while moving through the paths, observing other urban elements organized along the 
path. Although the train station itself is very hard to be conceptualized as a path, 
transit routes or railway tracks well furnish this dimension of the city image. For a 
sound number of people, railway paths are the prime element of city image, as they 
experience their city regularly while moving through the tracks. For instance, an urba­
nite, regularly traveling between his home and workplace through local trains in a mega­
city of India like Kolkata or Mumbai, experiences the lion’s share of his city from the 
railway tracks. However, the significance of a path may vary largely among individuals 
with varying degrees of familiarity with the urban landscape.
Nodes, as mentioned by Lynch (1960, 41), “are the points, the strategic spots in a city 
into which an observer can enter, and which are the intensive foci to and from which he is 
traveling”. Railway stations, without any sense of confusion, are the nodes in a transport 
network, being junctions of railway tracks or breaks in transportation modes. They in 
many instances function as the epitome and nucleus of an urban district, where they 
stand as identity makers by radiating their influences throughout the district. Although 
physically and conceptually they are small points in the city image, they may, in reality, be 
sizable squares, accommodating a variety of activities in their bodies and surroundings, 
or even central districts of a city when the city is being considered at a large enough 
(macro) level (Lynch 1960, 12). In other words, when a city is conceptualized as a 
macro unit by a person, railway stations and their neighborhoods within the city can 
be seen as micro units that encapsulate localized dynamics and interactions by posing 
distinct identities, socio-cultural patterns, and varying levels of urban amenities. The 
station as a junction or multimodal transport hub is of enthralling significance to a 
ASIAN GEOGRAPHER 
7

person entering a city, who is likely to develop a mind map of the city using the station as 
a key point of reference. In short, individuals tend to heighten their awareness of the city 
during transitions at such transportation nodes. These points serve as markers that delin­
eate shifts between different parts of the urban layout (Figure 2).
Districts, in the theory of Lynch (1960, 41), “are the medium-to-large sections of the 
city, conceived of as having two-dimensional extent, which the observer mentally enters 
‘inside off’ and which are recognizable as having some common, identifying character.” 
Being sharply different in terms of structure and activity from any other part of a city, 
railway stations and their immediate surroundings can be considered internally as a dis­
tinct functional entity as well as can be used as a point of external reference, forming what 
some people have known as railway districts or neighborhoods. The identity and image­
ability of a train station as a visible and distinct element of city image not only depend on 
its role as a node in a transport network but also a place in the urban landscape (Bertolini 
and Spit 1998).
Being the points of radical reference with sharp, distinct and identifiable physical 
characteristics, railway stations offer a host of possibilities to become urban landmarks 
of substantial importance. This role of train stations is somehow identical to their role 
as urban districts. However, here the observer does not enter the station but considers 
Figure 2. Chennai Central Railway Station, a multimodal transport hub (node) where a large number 
of formal and informal modes of transport converge. Additionally, the station serves as the gateway to 
the central business district of the city. It goes without saying that the station architecture of Chennai 
Central serves as a canvas on which a newcomer in the city can easily gain an impression of the colo­
nial past of the city (Source: Author).
8 
I. BANERJEE

the station as a point of reference from an entirely external perspective. Hence, a station 
can be imagined as a landmark from three distinct perspectives: visual, structural and 
cognitive (Sorrows and Hirtle 1999). From a visual point of view, a station may consist 
of elements of sharp contrast from its surroundings. It may have a prominent spatial 
location within the city, and it may have some visually conspicuous characteristics in 
its environment. As a structural landmark, a station can be conceptualized as a point 
whose significance arises from its functionality or location in the structure of the 
space (Sorrows and Hirtle 1999). As a cognitive landmark, a station is associated with 
its role as an organizing concept for space and the meaning that emerges out of it (Gol­
ledge 1999). This depicts the importance of a station in an individual’s cognitive compre­
hension of an environment. Hence, train stations can enable one to encode spatial 
relationships among paths and objects, contributing to the development of a cognitive 
map of a city (Sorrows and Hirtle 1999).
Finally, the last element of city image is edges, which “are linear elements not used or 
considered as paths by the observer. They are the boundaries between two phases, linear 
breaks in continuity … ” (Lynch 1960, 41). The chief characteristic of edges as authentic 
organizing features is their linear continuity (Filomena, Verstegen, and Manley 2019). In 
a broader sense, the linearity of a station, evident from its long platforms, may serve as 
lateral references to imagine the edge of a city or neighborhood. These edge elements, 
even though possibly not as commanding as paths, are important organizing entities 
for many observers, especially due to their roles in enclosing generalized areas like an 
outline (Lynch 1960, 41). Additionally, in many instances, train stations and tracks do 
act as the edges of an entire city. For example, in the city of Siliguri, which has long 
been recognized as a product of railways in India (Gangopadhyay 2019), the entire 
southern boundary of the city is currently marked by the New Jalpaiguri Railway 
Station (one of the busiest railway stations of North-Eastern India) and the associated 
railway tracks. Currently, railway tracks and stations are also acting as boundaries 
between some municipal wards of a city.
4.2. Railway station and the image of the city: identity, structure and meaning
An environmental image of a city, as conceptualized by Lynch (1960, 9), “may be ana­
lyzed into three components: identity, structure and meaning.” It, however, needs to 
be remembered that in physical space these three elements are difficult to be separated 
and, therefore, need to be conceptualized together to portray the image of a city. A sen­
sible image of an artefact first requires recognition of the object, that in turn insinuates 
the object’s contrast from other physical elements and its identity as an independent 
whole. This implies an object’s identity is not developed in isolation but in terms of its 
separability or uniqueness. Sak (2008, 15) asserts that “what is implied by identity is 
more a physical datum, not independent from circumstantial inputs, mainly explicit in 
the body of the city.” Train station apparently is an urban entity with sharp distinctive­
ness from others, identifiable and thus, has an identity in its own right. What creates the 
identity of a station is a coalescence of robust activities, rigid elements and their mutual 
interrelations (Carrera 1998). Among the abovementioned five elements of a station 
image, “district” and “landmark” appear to be more closely associated with the notion 
of “identity”.
ASIAN GEOGRAPHER 
9

Furthermore, the role of station architecture and its association with the urban history 
of the city where it is placed have a direct role to play in the formation of the urban iden­
tity of a railway station. For instance, in the case of India, the size and architecture of the 
railway stations have always had close conformity with the size, nature and history of the 
city where they were located. The train stations in cities like Bombay (Mumbai), Calcutta 
(Kolkata) and Madras (Chennai) are stupendous and majestic not only because they are 
associated with large and busy cities but also due to their associations with the principal 
chairs of colonial power in India. Since these cities were entirely of colonial interest and 
owed their origin to the imperial rule in India, their railway stations were designed to 
narrate the same story (Satow and Desmond 1980). This was not exclusive to the colonial 
metropolises of India; rather, the identity of the train station as a narrator of urban 
history could have been visible throughout the entire length and width of the country. 
The station architecture of Lucknow Charbagh, Kanpur Central or the old Delhi 
station speaks a lot about their rich Islamic history. Not very surprisingly, a newcomer 
to the city of Varanasi (Figure 3), Puri or Haridwar who enter the city through the 
railway station can easily trace the history of those cities from their station architecture 
and get an important insight into the images of those cities as major chairs of Hinduism. 
However, the identity of a station is not a thing to be physically understood solely in 
terms of station architecture; sometimes, it is conceptualized as an outcome instead of 
an entity (Keith and Pile 1993, 28). Accordingly, while identifying the station, the 
Figure 3. Varanasi Junction Railway Station, the gateway to the city of Varanasi and a portrayer of the 
city’s image as one of the major chairs of Hinduism (Source: Author).
10 
I. BANERJEE

substratum processes behind the formation and functionality of the station are as impor­
tant as its physical attributes.
Next to identity, structure is the body and form of an object that has a direct bearing on 
the formation of its image. Lynch (1960, 8) defines structure as “the spatial or pattern 
relation of the object to the observer and other objects”. The image of a train station 
largely depends on its spatial or structural association with the remaining urban land­
scape, which in turn shapes the perceiver’s cognitive association with the station. 
Without referring to the interrelations of a station with the remaining city, the organiz­
ation of the station’s physical space cannot be fully understood (Carrera 1998). Thus, a 
broad definition of the structure of a station may encompass all the formal characteristics 
of a system of correspondence and the physical elements that partake in such organizing 
correspondences (Carrera 1998; Norberg-Schulz 1980). In this regard, the “node”, “path” 
and “edge” elements seem to have a direct bearing on the structure of the station building 
on one hand, and its physical and functional association with the remaining part of a city 
on the other hand.
Finally, it is meaning that represents the cognitive importance of an artefact to the per­
ceiver, either for emotional or practical reasons. While perceiving an entity in a city (like 
a station), each individual tends to construct a mental image of the object, linking that 
image to their prior experiences, feelings and senses and creating a meaning out of it. 
All these things happen within a fraction of a second. In other words, a perceiver attaches 
meaning to an observed entity when he/she sees, hears, touches, and rarely tastes and 
smells it, and accumulates all these senses together to bracket them with prior experi­
ences (Carrera 1998). A railway station is more than just a physical building; its 
meaning largely depends on its role as a representative of the city (landmark), a 
transit hub (path and node), a narrator of urban history (landmark and edge), and a 
place for people and activities (district). For people, its public nature underpins the pro­
duction of collective meanings and raises their cognizance of existence in a civilized 
environment (Sak 2008). Since meaning shapes a perceiver’s cognitive orientation and 
mental archive, more meaningful objects and experiences attached to them will be 
archived more strongly and have a greater probability of being retrieved for future refer­
ences, depending on the robustness of that meaning. Moreover, a person’s acquaintance 
with the activities and services offered by a station complex creates an accordance with 
the human senses of seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, and even tasting, thus contribut­
ing to its meaningfulness and consequent image formation. Based on these denominators 
of experience, the meaning attached to a station can be a combination of its public nature, 
prototypical characteristics, emblematic role, as well as people’s attachment to it.
4.3. Legibility and imageability of a railway station
In The Image of the City, Lynch largely focused on two cognitive qualities of the built 
environment that arise from its identity, structure and meaning: legibility and imageabil­
ity. Legibility refers to “the ease with which its [built-environment] parts can be recog­
nized and can be organized into a coherent pattern” (Lynch 1960, 60). It may also be 
called “visibility in a heightened sense, where objects are not only able to be seen, but 
are presented sharply and intensely to the senses” (9-10). Legibility or visibility contrib­
utes to the formation of the imageability of an object, which refers to the quality of the 
ASIAN GEOGRAPHER 
11

object that provides it with a high possibility of evoking a strong image in the mind of a 
perceiver (Lynch 1960, 9). In other words, imageability is the usefulness of different qual­
ities of an urban artefact, such as its physical shape, the arrangements of its parts, or its 
color, to represent it as a rigidly identifiable, strongly organized, and highly imaginable 
urban entity.
The legibility of a train station is unquestionable due to its strong visibility, represen­
tative architecture, and powerful command over the construction of spaces in and 
around its physical body (Banerjee and Saha 2022), which in turn has a direct association 
with the station’s “structure”. These features make a railway station a highly imaginable 
and distinct part of the urban landscape, with a sharp identity that can attract all the 
sensory organs of an observer towards greater awareness and participation (thus creating 
a strong “meaning”). In other words, the role of train stations as identity makers of urban 
landscape, their strong physical structure (that in turn is shaped by the five elements), 
and the meaning they generate in the mind of observers and users are all bi-directionally 
corresponding to the high legibility and imageability of their existence (Figure 4).
The legibility and imageability of a train station are so high that it fits well in both the 
categories of “Image” (capitalized) and “images” (non-capitalized) as described by Fabio 
Carrera (1998, 9), where “[t]he quintessential mental Image (capitalized) is made up of a 
layering of all sensate inputs, above and beyond just the visual inputs that belong to the 
second class of images (lower-case, generic)”. A station can convey the “Image” of an 
entire city to an observer who enters the city through the station by appealing to all of 
the observer’s senses. The size, crowdedness, architecture and cleanliness of the station 
can serve as representatives of the city’s size, population, history, aesthetics and other 
characteristics to the visitor. For instance, it is not very difficult for a person to identify 
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Terminus as a representative of Mumbai city, whether in 
Bollywood movies or in reality (Mehta 2004; UIC 2019). Thus, due to its high degree 
of legibility and imageability, a station building is sufficient enough to represent a mega­
city like Mumbai. Moreover, the nature of social spaces that are continuously being pro­
duced within the railway stations of Mumbai and their immediate neighborhoods also 
contribute significantly to the image of Mumbai as a diverse megapolis. These social 
spaces, for instance, are characterized by high-density passenger movements, the pres­
ence of passengers from different backgrounds (a glimpse of which can be seen from 
Suketu Mehta’s book on Mumbai, “Maximum City [2004]”), and informal occupations. 
Thus in Mumbai, railway stations become places where architecture often fades away as a 
material fact, and is substituted by population’s sheer characteristics, forming a visual 
overlay that takes the place of the physical infrastructure underneath (Rao 2007). On 
the other hand, due to its sharp visual characteristics, a station complex can be a part 
of distinct optical “images” which, when combined, portray the entire image of a city. 
This is the reason that iconic station buildings, due to their outstanding architectural 
designs and well-conformity with urban history, are drawn upon by different agencies 
as one of the dominant images for branding a city. As an illustration, Howrah station’s 
representative architecture (strong optical characteristics) has been used in combination 
with some other elements of Kolkata city, such as the Victoria Memorial and Howrah 
Bridge, to portray the whole image of Kolkata by a fair number of authorities. Train 
stations, therefore, have a paramount role in the formation of the image of a city 
because people heighten their attention at such places and perceive nearby elements 
12 
I. BANERJEE

with more than normal clarity (Lynch 1960; Sak 2008). Understanding what makes 
railway stations imageable and legible could help planners create environments around 
them that people can remember perceptibly, producing impressions of urban beauty 
and delight in the minds of residents and visitors alike (Ishikawa 2018).
5. Paving the path towards a new contribution to the notion of rail-based 
TOD
Buildings of any kind pose the quality to represent their own era as well as socio-econ­
omic and political happenings from the pages of history. Railway stations in India or 
Figure 4. Cognitive dimensions and decision making (Inspired by Lynch 1960). Note: two-way arrows 
stand for birectional impacts and one-way arrows depict unidirectional impacts.
ASIAN GEOGRAPHER 
13

anywhere in the world pose enough structural qualities to represent the state of develop­
ment achieved by their respective countries. As the gateways to a city, they create the very 
first and last impression of the city for a visitor. Moreover, for residents of a city, train 
stations on a visible scale have proven themselves as genuine public space because 
“people at large need no legitimating purpose to enter and to use” them (Graham  
2006, 248). Accordingly, when the role of train stations in urban (re)development is 
brought into discussion, the concept of TOD becomes the most obvious path to orches­
trate such discussion. Over the last two to three decades, rail-based TOD has evidently 
become a popular concept. It stands as an illuminating planning paradigm for discerning 
the profound impact of railway stations on the socio-spatial development of urban 
centers, as the concept has been acclaimed for its transformative roles in rendering pre­
viously unattractive neighborhoods around train stations into vibrant, enviable districts 
(Bernick and Cervero 1998; Bertolini and Spit 1998; Hariharan 2017). There are enough 
academic literature as well as empirical evidence to speak that TOD endeavors have the 
remarkable capability to breathe new life into station neighborhoods that were otherwise 
perceived as unattractive due to a number of reasons like noise effects, crime status 
associated with the stations, unpleasant railway landscapes and others (Banerjee and 
Saha 2023; Bonnet 2009; Hariharan 2017; NIUA 2016; UIC 2019; Yildirim and Arefi  
2020). TOD, therefore, is a complex tool and strategy that can efficiently contribute to 
more sustainable transportation patterns, reduced emissions, land use development, 
employment generation, and enhanced regional connectivity (Thomas and Bertolini  
2020, 1). Today, one would be hard-pressed to discover a policy document on smart, sus­
tainable, and inclusive urban growth where the role of public transit in general, and rail 
transit in particular, is not enthusiastically supported (Cervero, Guerra, and Al 2017, 
109).
In the context of rail-based TOD, it can be readily affirmed that railway stations have 
emerged as catalysts of contemporary urbanism, extending their pertinence far beyond 
the mobility of people and products or the economic and social virtues that the 
railway stations produce in their respective cities. At present, railway stations have 
largely acquired emblematic and experiential connotations as identity makers, becoming 
important city marketing strategies that help to promote the international projection of 
cities – something that is of immense interest in the contemporary context of urban com­
petitiveness at the global and national levels, where cultural dynamics linked to leisure- 
consumption acquire great prominence (Díez-Pisonero 2021). In other words, since the 
last quarter of the previous century, these magnificent infrastructures have been devoted 
as elements to stand up for the repositioning of urban areas and meliorate urban com­
petitiveness in national and global contexts, while attracting new capital investments, fur­
nishing places and depicting an image of power, prosperity and standing. Nevertheless, 
although TOD is believed to be an avenue of immense possibility for the economic and 
social development of a country by a group of specialists, criticisms continue to appear 
from different directions suggesting that TOD solely facilitates and serves a specific 
section of society, and goes principally after the assurance of white collar jobs (Díez-Piso­
nero 2021; Du, Druta, and van Wesemael 2021; He, Mol, and Lu 2016).
Thus, diverse expressions of social opposition arise, driven above all by the negative 
social and environmental consequences of TOD-driven mega-scale infrastructural pro­
jects (Díez-Pisonero 2021). The lion’s share of these reactions is grounded precisely on 
14 
I. BANERJEE

the policy interventions in local communities, especially those belonging to the lower 
economic strata, financial threats to the socio-economically marginalized communities, 
visible changes in land use with implications on ecology and biodiversity, deterministic 
planning approaches with restricted or no scope for public participation, and public 
health externalities of infrastructure undertakings (He, Mol, and Lu 2016). As a result, 
spatial forms proposed by neoliberal ambitions, aspects of marketability and competi­
tiveness prevail over human capital, the ideals of equity, and sustainability, putting on 
the table the question of “for whom” these pieces of global infrastructure are provided 
(Jacobs 1984; cited in Díez-Pisonero 2021).
These reactions affirm that the fruitful implementation of any urban development 
venture relies not only on the physical embellishment of urbanscapes but also on the 
social and cognitive value associated with them, in conformity with the theoretical 
notion of “social justice” in a city (Fainstein 2014; Harvey 2009). All these arguments 
indicate an immediate need to re-think TOD as an urban regeneration tool to 
combine concerns for human cognitive value with physical amelioration and economic 
profitability considerations, so as to make these endeavors more people-oriented. If not, 
then it may lead to an underestimation of human costs of such megaprojects, exagger­
ation of economic and social benefits, as well as homogenization of urban landscape 
by designing emblematic buildings from one city to another rather than distinguishing 
(Díez-Pisonero 2021). Furthermore, this issue is much more acute in developing 
nations as compared to the developed ones. As Du, Druta, and van Wesemael (2021, 
1177) pronounced: 
“station areas in suburbs or undeveloped areas, particularly in developing countries, are 
used at a low rate and used by monotonous user group, which means high demands for 
place quality may not be apparent yet. While the central station areas and stations in the 
developed countries stress more to fulfil users’ needs, since the land use and transport 
network have been already relatively formed. This possibly interprets that why developed 
countries pay more attention to the study of place quality, particularly to the experiential 
dimension [where cognitive value has a direct role to play], than the developing countries 
do.”
For instance, in India, railway station redevelopment and associated TOD gained a place 
in urban policy debates only in the last decade. In 2009 a Manual for Standards and Spe­
cifications for Railway Stations (MoR 2009) was published by the Ministry of Railways, 
which was modified in 2020. In the modified draft, it has been stated that (MoR 2020, 37): 
“The heritage on Indian Railway stations being a living heritage shall not be considered 
merely as a cost which requires special efforts for maintenance and preservation, but 
shall be so planned as to provide additional revenues through creative use of spaces for 
showcasing the local history, railway history, historical artefacts.”
However, this statement appears to be applicable only to those stations that possess “heri­
tage” structures in their body or premise, and not to those stations which are relatively 
recent manifestations of urban history in India. Moreover, recent endeavors of the 
Indian Railways in station redevelopment and TOD, either in the form of actual practice 
(as recently happened in Habibganj railway station of Bhopal) or policy/planning drafts, 
do not show much conformity with the cognitive qualities of train stations (see Banerjee  
forthcoming; Hariharan 2017 for a detailed understanding of contemporary Indian 
ASIAN GEOGRAPHER 
15

initiatives towards station redevelopment and rail-based TOD). These endeavors are por­
trayed as ambitious (re)development of Indian train stations and their districts in order 
to brand Indian cities as more suitable places to live, work, and socialize at a global scale. 
Yet, it is unclear, both in academic literature and policy drafts, where the role of station 
space (both architectural and social) in portraying the typical image of its mother city has 
been visible.
Part of the problem regarding the negligence of the cognitive characteristics of railway 
stations by TOD practices is that the business activities for which TOD broadly advocates 
require a substantial amount of furnished, structured office spaces that frequently result 
in the development of large-scale, monotonous, and relatively schematic areas (Trip  
2008). This raises concerns about homogenization. However, cognitive quality is vulner­
able to ignorance in the traditional cost–benefit analysis of TOD as cognitive standards, 
i.e. the standards to perpetuate the cognitive dimension of train stations after TOD- 
driven redevelopment, are customarily tough to fit into monetary labels. Nevertheless, 
this research argues that the TOD projects can justify their cognitive stance, along 
with the glittering visions of economic, social (or recreational), and environmental 
goals, without facing many difficulties.
One of the most potent pathways to recognize the role of a station as a city image 
builder is to create a sense of conformity between the station’s architecture (even after 
modernization or redevelopment) and the urban history of a city, instead of using 
some sophisticated architectural designs which make all the stations look the same 
with different shapes and sizes. Following Lynchian arguments, it can be stated that 
railway station as a successful node in a city must be unique in some way and simul­
taneously must intensify some surrounding activities (as a district) that contribute to 
that uniqueness (Gnatiuk, Kononenko, and Mezentsev 2022). Instead of homogenized 
concentrations of office and high-commercial establishments, local products, such as 
foods and local garments, may have some contributions to the uniqueness of station 
building or premise. Another possible alternative can be associated with the production 
of thematic railway spaces in TOD neighborhoods, like rail-coach restaurants or shops 
selling local products, or railway parks for children. These spaces on one hand will encou­
rage better social interaction, and prevent the homogenization of space in TOD neigh­
borhoods on the other hand. This venture, in turn, is capable of visibly fostering the 
production of an environment contributing to a better sense of community. Railway 
stations, thus, can better accommodate the intersection of several activities like transport, 
cultural, economic, social, administrative, communication, and others; serving as a node, 
nodal area (district), the spatial skeleton of a city (path and edge) and, finally, a point of 
reference with its uniqueness (landmark) (Gnatiuk, Kononenko, and Mezentsev 2022).
Since TOD advocates for the high density and diversity of residences in the neighbor­
hoods, it is highly probable that the stations’ spatial elements will have a wider and varied 
user base. Due to their socially inclusive characteristics (as railway medium is believed to 
be highly affordable in both developed and developing countries), station space can 
usually become one of the most inexpensive spaces in a city, offering exclusive rec­
reational and other social facilities for a wide variety of urban residents who cannot 
afford spaces like golf courses, theme parks, or clubs. Moreover, being the point of 
confluence of different social groups, including locals and visitors, the railway station 
is potent enough to represent the image of a city through place-making, where people 
16 
I. BANERJEE

will not be considered mere spectators in the public space but will participate in the pro­
duction process of the public space (Muleya and Campbell 2020). Human beings esteem 
control over their surroundings, and inadequate institutionalized power to particiapate 
in planning and decision-making may set individual urbanites apart from their environ­
ments. These perceptions extend Lynch’s notion of imageability, depicting that obser­
vation, knowledge, and engagement in one’s surrounding environment can directly 
serve individual wellbeing and help determine whether spatial interventions have rel­
evance to the daily lives of urban dwellers (Mondschein and Moga 2018). This endeavor 
of inclusive decision-making in TOD planning will perhaps be possible only when people 
– both TOD residents and visitors – are capable enough to understand the importance of 
the station building, among many other buildings of the city, in the urban landscape and 
its association with the history of the city where it is placed. In other words, it is impor­
tant to make people, especially those who are regularly using the transit service and/or 
living in transit-oriented neighborhoods, understand why the station really matters.
6. Conclusion
The fruitful implementation of urban design endeavors is firmly associated with the ways 
people interact with a particular physical space and the apprehension of the role these 
interactions play in the physical, social and mental wellbeing of urbanites. This paper 
attempts to highlight the compound role that railway stations play in shaping both the 
internal and external images of a city. The study emphasizes that a train station can be 
seen as an anecdote about the history and evolution of a city, a system of interaction 
between different human groups, a space for the production and provision of services, 
a place of collective consumption and linked decisions, an arena of physical vigor, or a 
field of conflict.
Furthermore, the paper refers to rail-based TOD as one of the potent subjects of urban 
planning, where railway stations can be conceptualized as more than just transport build­
ings or diversified economic hubs. Since the idea of rail-based TOD is predominantly 
grounded on the interplay between transportation and land use characteristics of train 
stations and their immediate surroundings, the paper argues that the economic and phys­
ical aspects of station neighborhood planning to a great extent dominated the academic 
debates and practices of TOD. The prominent theories of TOD stress the economic (and 
very recently social) performance of land use and transit. The cognitive dimension of 
railway stations remains vague and insufficiently understood in formulating and imple­
menting TOD plans. Against this backdrop, the present research endeavors to put a dis­
cussion forward on the cognitive importance of railway stations and their contribution to 
the identity of urban landscapes. It argues that the image of a train station and its con­
tribution to the overall image of a city are some of the broad fields that ask for substantial 
attention from planners and practitioners, who shape two elementary constituents of 
urban space, nodes and places, as well as their complementary relation through TOD 
plans (Figure 4).
This research might be considered the point of departure for a new academic debate 
on the role of the cognitive value of train stations in contemporary rail-based TOD pro­
grams. Some of the most potent research questions that may succeed this paper are: Why 
would people choose to visit a train station with the purpose of spending some quality 
ASIAN GEOGRAPHER 
17

time there when it sometimes offers the same function as any other designed urban space 
of the city? How can the representativeness of a train station (of the city where it is 
placed) be considered one of its integral cognitive qualities, along with its node and 
place characters? What measures can be taken to evaluate the “degree of representative­
ness” of railway stations across geographical spaces? How can the image of a train station 
and its capability to brand an entire city and foster a better sense of togetherness, belong­
ing and pride for the citizens (both living in station/TOD neighborhoods and outside)? 
In what ways can the cognitive and economic values of railway stations be corroborated 
in the best possible manner so that both values can contribute to the TOD plans as comp­
lementary instead of contradictory measures?
These research questions for future studies can help TOD practitioners enhance their 
understanding of railway stations as a place and assist them in considering the fact that 
the image of a train station may have substantial power to shape or re-shape people’s per­
ception of identity and meaning of not only the TOD neighborhood but also of the whole 
city. TOD planners, thus, can make use of this path to construct genuine structures and 
activities of the city towards more meaningfulness, legibility, memorability and 
significance.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
This work was supported by University Grants Commission: [Grant Number 190510006296].
References
Banerjee, Iman. 2021. “Exploring the Prospect of Varanasi City for Rail-Based Transit-Oriented 
Devevelopment: Insights from Select Theories and Practices.” National Geographical Journal 
of India 67 (4): 455–471. https://doi.org/10.48008/ngji.1791.
Banerjee, Iman. Forthcoming. “Railopolis: City Within A City.” Journal of Urbanism: International 
Research on Placemaking and Urban Sustainability, https://doi.org/10.1080/17549175.2022. 
2074523.
Banerjee, Iman, and Apala Saha. 2022. “Mobility Centre-Oriented Urban Regeneration: 
Examining Place Value of Railway Stations.” GeoJournal 87 (4): 567–581. https://doi.org/10. 
1007/s10708-022-10582-y.
Banerjee, Iman, and Apala Saha. 2023. “Railway Landscape and Urban Marginalisation: 
Rethinking Transit-Oriented Development.” Economic and Political Weekly 58 (7): 23–27.
Beckerich, Christophe, Sylvie Benoit-Bazin, and Marie Delaplace. 2017. “Does High Speed Rail 
Affect the Behaviour of Firms Located in Districts Around Central Stations? The Results of 
Two Surveys Conducted in Reims in 2008 and 2014.” Transportation Research Procedia 25: 
3017–3034. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trpro.2017.05.287.
Bernick, Michael, and Robert Cervero. 1998. “Transit Villages in the 21st Century.” Economic 
Geography 74 (4): 440–442. https://doi.org/10.2307/144337.
Bertolini, Luca. 1999. “Spatial Development Patterns and Public Transport: The Application of an 
Analytical Model in The Netherlands.” Planning Practice and Research 14 (2): 199–210. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/02697459915724.
18 
I. BANERJEE

Bertolini, Luca, and Tejo Spit. 1998. Cities on Rails: The Redevelopment of Railway Station Areas. 
London: Routledge.
Bonnet, François. 2009. “Managing Marginality in Railway Stations: Beyond the Welfare and 
Social Control Debate.” International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 33 (4): 1029– 
1044. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2427.2009.00920.x.
Carrera, Fabio. 1998. “The Image of the Good City.” Paper presented at the Imaging the City: The 
Place of Media in City Design and Development, Cambridge, UK, December 1998. 20 March 
2022. 
https://www.scribd.com/document/456615548/19956488-The-Image-of-a-Good-City- 
pdf.
Cervero, Robert, Erick Guerra, and Stefan Al. 2017. Beyond Mobility: Planning Cities for People 
and Places. Washington DC: Island Press.
Cheng, Jianquan, Luca Bertolini, Frank le Clercq, and Loek Kapoen. 2013. “Understanding Urban 
Networks: Comparing a Node-, a Density- and an Accessibility-Based View.” Cities 31: 165– 
176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2012.04.005.
Chorus, Paul, and Luca Bertolini. 2011. “An Application of the Node Place Model to Explore the 
Spatial Development Dynamics of Station Areas in Tokyo.” The Journal of Transport and Land 
Use 4 (1): 45–58.
Díez-Pisonero, R. 2021. “High-Speed Rail Stations and Airports: Symbolic Infrastructures of 
Mobility as “Places of Globalisation”.” Annals of the Austrian Geographical Society 1: 349– 
370. https://doi.org/10.1553/moegg163s349.
Du, Jinglun, Oana Druta, Pauline van den Berg, and Pieter JV van Wesemael. 2021. “How Do 
Socio-Demographic Characteristics Affect Users’ Perception of Place Quality at Station 
Areas? Evidence from Amsterdam, The Netherlands.” Urban Science 5: 80–17. https://doi. 
org/10.3390/urbansci5040080.
Du, Jinglun, Oana Druta, and Pieter van Wesemael. 2021. “Place Quality in High-Speed Rail 
Station Areas: Concept Definition.” Journal of Transport and Land Use 14 (1): 1165–1186. 
https://doi.org/10.5198/jtlu.2021.1820.
Duckworth-Smith, Anthony, and Courtney Babb. 2015. “Indicating Quality of Place for Station 
Precinct Development: Enhancing ‘place’ in the Place/Node Model.” Proceedings of the 7th 
State of Australian Cities Conference, Gold Coast, Australia, 9–11 December 2015. 12 
October 2022. https://apo.org.au/sites/default/files/resource-files/2015-12/apo-nid63332.pdf.
Fainstein, Susan. 2014. “The Just City.” International Journal of Urban Sciences 18 (1): 1–18. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/12265934.2013.834643.
Filomena, Gabriele, Judith A. Verstegen, and Ed Manley. 2019. “A Computational Approach to 
‘The Image of the City’.” Cities 89: 14–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2019.01.006.
Gangopadhyay, Ashok. 2019. Siliguri Sahor o Mahakuma Parichay (in Bengali). Kolkata: 
Raktakarabee.
Gnatiuk, Oleksiy, Olena Kononenko, and Kostyantyn Mezentsev. 2022. “Kyiv Metro and Urban 
Imageability: A Student Youth Vision.” AUC Geographica 57 (1): 16–30. https://doi.org/10. 
14712/23361980.2022.2.
Golledge, Reginald G. 1999. “Human Wayfinding and Cognitive Maps.” In Wayfinding Behavior: 
Cognitive Mapping and Other Spatial Processes, edited by Reginald G. Golledge, 5–45. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.
Graham, Gordon. 2006. “Can There Be Public Architecture?” The Journal of Aesthetics and Art 
Criticism 64 (2): 243–249. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0021-8529.2006.00245.x. https://www. 
jstor.org/stable/3700548.
Hariharan, Sanjeev. 2017. “Modernisation of Railway Stations in India - The Emergence of New 
Age Destinations.” Rail Transport Journal 26 (1): 37–52. 10 January 2022. http://www. 
academia.edu/36757477/Modernisation_of_Railway_Stations_in_India.
Harvey, David. 2009. Social Justice and the City. Revised Edition. Athens: University of Georgia 
Press.
He, Guizhen, Arthur P. J. Mol, and Yonglong Lu. 2016. “Public Protests Against the Beijing– 
Shenyang High-Speed Railway in China.” Transportation Research Part D: Transport and 
ASIAN GEOGRAPHER 
19

Environment 43: 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2015.11.009. https://www.jstor.org/stable/ 
3700548.
Ibraeva, Anna, Gonçalo Homem de Almeida Correia, Cecília Silva, and António Pais Antunes. 
2020. “Transit-oriented Development: A Review of Research Achievements and Challenges.” 
Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 132: 110–130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
tra.2019.10.018.
Ishikawa, Toru. 2018. “People in the Environment and Environments Perceived by People: 
Cognitive-Behavioural Approaches to Spatial Cognition.” Built Environment 44 (2): 192–204. 
https://doi.org/10.2148/benv.44.2.192.
Jacobs, Jane. 1984. Cities and the Wealth of Nations: Principles of Economic Life. Vintage.
Jacobson, Justin, and Ann Forsyth. 2008. “Seven American TODs: Good Practices for Urban 
Design in Transit-Oriented Development Projects.” Journal of Transport and Land Use 1 (2): 
51–88. https://doi.org/10.5198/jtlu.v1i2.67.
Jagga, Lajpat Rai. 2013. “Formation of an Industrial Labour Force and Forms of Labour Protest in 
India: A Study of the Railways.” (PhD thesis). Jawaharlal Nehru University.
Joshi, Rutul, Yogi Joseph, Kavina Patel, and Vishal Darji. 2017. Transit-Oriented Development: 
Lessons from Indian Experiences. Working Paper 36. Ahmedabad: Centre for Urban Equity.
Keith, Michael, and Steve Pile. 1993. “Introduction: The Place of Politics.” In Place and the Politics 
of Identity, edited by Michael Keith, and Steve Pile, 1–21. London: Routledge.
Kitchin, Rob. 2014. The Data Revolution: Big Data, Open Data, Data Infrastructures, and Their 
Consequences. London: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Lynch, Kevin. 1960. The Image of the City. MA: The M.I.T. Press.
Lynch, Kevin. 1981. A Theory of Good City Form. MA: The M.I.T. Press.
Mehta, Suketu. 2004. Maximum City: Bombay Lost and Found. New York: Alfred Knopf.
Ministry of Railways (MoR). 2009. Manual for Standards and Specifications for Railway Stations. 
New Delhi: Government of India. 16 October 2022. https://rlda.indianrailways.gov.in/works/ 
uploads/File/Manual%20for%20WCS%20(Vol%201-%20Main%20Report).pdf.
Ministry of Railways (MoR). 2020. Report on Updation/ Revision of Manual for Standards and 
Specifications for Railway Stations 2009 & Cost Optimisation Strategies for Station 
Redevelopment Projects. New Delhi: Government of India. 16 October 2022. https://rlda. 
indianrailways.gov.in/uploads/Report%20on%20Updation-Revision%20of%20MSSR%202009- 
Sept_−2020.pdf.
Mohammad, Sara I., Daniel J. Graham, Patricia C. Melo, and Richard J. Anderson. 2013. “A Meta- 
Analysis of the Impact of Rail Projects on Land and Property Values.” Transportation Research 
Part A: Policy and Practice 50: 158–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2013.01.013.
Mondschein, Andrew, and Steven T. Moga. 2018. “New Directions in Cognitive-Environmental 
Research.” Journal of the American Planning Association 84 (3-4): 263–275. doi:10.1080/ 
01944363.2018.1526644.
Muleya, Nicholas, and Maléne Campbell. 2020. “A Multisensory Approach to Measure Public 
Space Quality in the City of Bulawayo, Zimbabwe.” Town and Regional Planning 76: 56–71. 
https://doi.org/10.18820/2415-0495/trp76i1.5.
National Institute of Urban Affairs (NIUA). 2016. Transit Oriented Development for Indian Smart 
Cities. 25 January. https://niua.org/tod/todfisc/book.php?book=1&section=3#supersection-1.
Norberg-Schulz, Christian. 1980. Genius Loci: Towards a Phenomenology of Architecture. 
New York: Rizzoli.
Pinheiro, José Q. 1998. “Determinants of Cognitive Maps of the World as Expressed in Sketch 
Maps.” Journal of Environmental Psychology 18 (3): 321–339. https://doi.org/10.1006/jevp. 
1998.0100.
Rao, Vyjayanthi. 2007. “Proximate Distances: The Phenomenology of Density in Mumbai.” Built 
Environment 33 (2): 227–248. https://doi.org/10.2148/benv.33.2.227.
Reusser, Dominik E., Peter Loukopoulos, Michael Stauffacher, and Roland W. Scholz. 2008. 
“Classifying Railway Stations for Sustainable Transitions – Balancing Node and Place 
Functions.” Journal of Transport Geography 16 (3): 191–202. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jtrangeo.2007.05.004.
20 
I. BANERJEE

Sak, Segah. 2008. “Formation of the City Image: The Role of the Train Station in the Image 
Formation Process of Ankara.” (Master’s thesis). Bilkent University.
Satow, M., and R. Desmond. 1980. Railways of the Raj. London: Scholar Press.
Siegel, Alexander W., and Sheldon H. White. 1975. “The Development of Spatial Representations 
of Large-Scale Environments.” Advances in Child Development and Behavior 10: 9–55. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2407(08)60007-5.
Singh, Yamini Jain, Pedram Fard, Mark Zuidgeest, Mark Brussel, and Martin van Maarseveen. 
2014. “Measuring Transit Oriented Development: A Spatial Multi Criteria Assessment 
Approach for the City Region Arnhem and Nijmegen.” Journal of Transport Geography 35: 
130–143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2014.01.014.
Sorrows, Molly E., and Stephen Hirtle. 1999. “The Nature of Landmarks for Real and Electronic 
Spaces.” In Spatial Information Theory, Cognitive and Computational Foundations of 
Geographic Information Science, COSIT 1999, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, edited by C. 
Freksa, and D. M. Mark, 37–50. Berlin: Springer.
Thomas, Ren, and Luca Bertolini. 2020. Transit-Oriented Development: Learning from 
International Case Studies. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland.
Trip, Jan Jacob. 2008. “Urban Quality in High-Speed Train Station Area Redevelopment: The 
Cases of Amsterdam Zuidas and Rotterdam Centraal.” Planning Practice and Research 23 (3): 
383–401. https://doi.org/10.1080/02697450802423633.
UIC. 2019. Railway Stations: Boosting the City. Paris: International Union of Railways (UIC). 26 
October 2022. https://uic.org.
Yildirim, Yalcin, and Mahyar Arefi. 2020. “Stakeholders’ Perception of Sound in Transit-Oriented 
Developments (TODs).” Transportation Research Part D: Transport and Environment 87: 
102559. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2020.102559.
ASIAN GEOGRAPHER 
21