ISSN 0350-154X, eISSN 1846-7954, UDK 316
54 (2024), 2: 155–178
155
Home Decoration, Aesthetics, and Identity: Exploring 
Meanings in Dwelling Cultures 
DOI:10.5613/rzs.54.2.3
UDC 316.7
         316.334.54:316.728
Original Research Article
Received: 18 January 2024
Rašeljka KRNIĆ 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2370-433X
Institute of Social Sciences Ivo Pilar, Zagreb, Croatia
raseljka.krnic@pilar.hr
Sara URSIĆ 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4398-4383
Institute of Social Sciences Ivo Pilar, Zagreb, Croatia
sara.ursic@pilar.hr
ABSTRACT
Deeply rooted in personal and social identity, over the last two decades, the home has 
become an increasingly propulsive area of research within the social sciences and 
humanities. The concept of home often serves as a platform for understanding complex 
social relationships between individuals and groups and reveals the meanings arising 
from interactions with material culture. In this paper, we use data obtained through 
the interview method to find out how our participants – younger middle-aged, middle-
class professionals – value the aesthetic dimension of their home and what meanings 
they ascribe to it. The analysis of the narratives on aesthetics, taste, and processes 
related to decision-making provides insight into how certain attitudes are associated with 
various dimensions of participants’ identities. The results demonstrated that through the 
elaboration of the visual identity of space, it is possible to articulate different aspects 
of personal and collective identities. Although the obtained data show how taste and 
attitudes towards aesthetics function as inherited cultural capital, they also reveal how 
other cultural influences in a complex postmodern consumer context shape attitudes and 
tastes beyond directly inherited values.
Key words: 	
home decoration, aesthetics, identity, consumption, cultural capital
1. INTRODUCTION
Considering that most people spend a large part of their time in their homes, ei­
ther alone or in some form of community, it can be said that the home and the 
numerous processes related to its creation are extremely important constitutive

156
Revija za sociologiju | Croatian Sociological Review 54 (2024), 2: 155–178
elements of life, both in social and personal terms. Deeply rooted in personal and 
social identity, over the last two decades, the home has become an increasingly 
propulsive area of research within the social sciences and humanities. The concept 
of home has served many researchers as a platform for understanding complex 
social relationships between individuals and groups, and for analysing the mean­
ings arising from interactions with material culture. The place and characteristics 
of the space in which we live produce and reflect numerous aspects of our lives, 
from emotional connections, socialisation, social status, and ideology to physical 
and mental health. Thus, through the concept of home it is possible to explore nu­
merous processes such as mobility, construction of social and personal identities, 
emotions and belonging, power relations, symbolic meanings, taste, etc. (Short, 
1999; Boccagni and Kusenbach, 2020). 
In an attempt to understand everything that home represents (at the structural 
but also micro-level), in various cultures, among different age groups and family 
types, and in many other contexts, artefacts and practices that are mostly taken for 
granted, such as sofas, bathrooms, chandeliers, paintings, decorations, laundry 
or food preparation are viewed through the application of various theoretical para­
digms and concepts. The considerations of numerous dimensions of housing deal 
with the culture of housing, which, as a sociological concept, implies residence as 
a daily practice. Through material form, symbolic and cultural capital, the home is 
formed and realised as an intersection of “individual identity, social relations, and 
collective meaning” (Short, 1999: 10). 
If we start from the assumption that all aspects of housing say something about 
the users of a specific space, then, in addition to researching the structural mac­
ro-dimensions of housing, we should also be interested in it at the micro-level, i.e. 
the interest should be focused on uncovering and deciphering the meanings and 
practices that occur behind closed doors. Such studies have grown in number over 
the last two decades, and among other topics, they deal with the role of aesthetics 
and decoration in the process of imagining and constructing the idea of home. 
Different items in the house, including furniture, are not just consumer goods that 
are consumed but play one of the central roles in the construction of what we call 
home. In other words, these objects are not just objects that we use inside our 
homes, but they constitute our homes (Cieraad, 1999; Miller, 2001, Reimer and 
Leslie, 2004). As Gullestad (1995: 319–20) notes: “The home is a rich, flexible and 
ambiguous symbol; it can simultaneously signify individual identity, family solidar­
ity and a whole range of other values.” Among all the items we own, the ones we 
choose to use or surround ourselves with in our own homes probably speak the 
most about us. These objects are special because they are chosen to be close to 
us and at hand, to be looked at almost every day or used as needed, becoming

157
Rašeljka Krnić, Sara Ursić: Home Decoration, Aesthetics, and Identity: Exploring Meanings in Dwelling Cultures
part of our intimate life and, thus, participating in the creation of our identities. We 
choose the objects we own mostly by ourselves, they are not imposed on us from 
the outside, and if necessary, we can get rid of them, if for some reason they do not 
suit us, so we can say that the material culture of our home “constitutes an ecology 
of signs that reflects as well as shapes the pattern of the owner’s self” (Csikszent­
mihalyi and Rochberg-Halton, 1999: 17)
The objects selected can serve varied purposes, according to the needs of the 
situation, and can also change meaning depending on the context. Sometimes 
when objects are exposed, they have a public role as a marker of status, style, or 
taste, and in some cases, they are also a catalyst for building self-identity and man­
aging family relationships or self-esteem. In this sense, the spaces of home and 
the material culture that constitutes that space are the intersections of public and 
private life, where the production of meaning in spatial organisation reflects per­
sonal, social, and family relations (Csikszentmihalyi and Rochberg-Halton, 1999; 
Lawrence, 1987). The way home users relate to objects and how they understand 
and explain their aesthetic choices reveals consumption as a process of producing 
meanings, where these meanings are managed through the creation of narratives 
in conjunction with specific elements of material culture. These narratives in this 
context often serve as a symbolic boundary, i.e. an instrument of distinction with 
the purpose of categorising tastes, people, and practices (Lamont and Molnár, 
2002). In the chapter focusing on the elaboration of theoretical concepts on which 
this study relies, the structuralist approach to understanding cultural preferences 
by Pierre Bourdieu will be presented, along with the postmodernist paradigm of un­
derstanding consumption, which builds its fundamental features through a critique 
of the class-deterministic approach.
In this paper, we use the data obtained through the interview method to find 
out to what extent and in which manner our participants – younger middle-aged, 
middle-class professionals – value the decorative and aesthetic dimension of their 
homes, what meanings they ascribe to it, and what kinds of practices and strate­
gies they use in the process of deciding on the visual identity of the space in which 
they live. By analysing their narratives on aesthetics, taste, and different processes 
related to decision-making, we wanted to gain insight into how certain attitudes and 
behaviours in this context are related to the formation and reflection of different 
dimensions of their identities, i.e. what actors “inscribe” in space when they inter­
vene in it. In addition, we wanted to find out which processes and mechanisms are 
involved in the construction of identity through the development and demonstration 
of tastes, which of those we can associate with modernism, and which with the 
postmodern understanding of the connection between consumption and identity 
formation. The main analytical objective of the paper is to examine the connection

158
Revija za sociologiju | Croatian Sociological Review 54 (2024), 2: 155–178
between inherited cultural capital, as understood in Pierre Bourdieu’s approach, 
and home decoration preferences, exploring the balance between structural fac­
tors and the impact of individual choices beyond structural determinism, drawing 
on theories of postmodern consumption.
In the following chapters, we present a theoretical framework that includes an 
overview of different theoretical concepts dealing with consumption, taste and 
identity, research methodology, results, and discussion of results. 
2. CONSUMPTION AND TASTE BETWEEN STRUCTURE AND 
FREEDOM
The turnaround in the humanities and social sciences during the 1970s regarding 
research dealing with consumption implied, among other things, shifting the focus 
from the instrumental aspects of consumption and the paradigm of economism 
to its symbolic aspects, with a particular emphasis on communication capacities. 
The sociology of consumption, which gained considerable momentum due to these 
shifts, increasingly focused on analyses that recognised the role that new forms of 
consumption play in the consolidation of social relations, personal development, 
expression of identity, and the general expansion of cultural experience for many 
people (Warde, 2002). 
Studies have become interested in the semiotic and experiential context of var­
ious processes of cultural production and consumption, the analysis of subcultural 
movements, popular culture, and mass media, and understanding the role of style 
and taste in the formation of group and individual identities. The choice of certain 
artefacts was increasingly understood as a way of expressing and forming identity 
through symbolic representation in a specific lifestyle. Activities, choices, judge­
ments, and meanings produced through consumption processes have become 
extremely important expressive elements of symbolic communication of identity 
(Warde, 2014). According to Silverstone, “The core of man’s cultural activity lies in 
his capacity to generate meaning, to communicate, to transmit and to order those 
meanings; it lies in the creation of a specifically symbolic level of existence” (Sil­
verstone, 1981: 2).
The thesis on the symbolic capacity of consumption and the choice of specific 
cultural goods and services as a symbolic mechanism of identity formation is con­
sidered the starting point of understanding consumption within different theoretical 
and research approaches, and in this sense, it can be said that there is a con­
sensus within the associated academic discourse. However, significant theoretical 
differences are found in the context of grasping the essential nature of consump­

159
Rašeljka Krnić, Sara Ursić: Home Decoration, Aesthetics, and Identity: Exploring Meanings in Dwelling Cultures
tion, creating tension between understanding these processes in the modern or 
postmodern key. 
A number of authors have approached the understanding of consumption and 
the production of symbolic meanings in the consumption context from the perspec­
tive of structural determinism. Different forms of consumption and different cultures 
of taste are understood here as the consequence of class differences that are 
manifested in specific cultural preferences (Bourdieu, 1984; De Graaf, 1991; Spell­
erberg, 1995). For Bourdieu (1984), who offered one of the most influential theories 
of consumption, taste is socially constructed and is an expression of the class 
position that is largely inherited. Books on the shelves, music, gastronomic prefer­
ences, paintings on the walls, hobbies, the part of the city where one lives, furniture 
choices, etc. are all expressions of cultural capital that define one’s personal and 
social identity. The class position and social milieu in which an individual grows and 
continues to live will determine the level of cultural, economic, and social capital 
that the individual possesses, and the level of capital will largely determine the 
forms of consumption, according to Bourdieu (1984). Different consumer orienta­
tions represent a mechanism of distinction and indicate the existence of different 
cultures of taste within social classes. In this sense, taste plays a symbolic demar­
cation role between “us” and “them”. According to this understanding, the dominant 
social class maintains and reproduces status hierarchies and distinctions within so­
cial, political, and cultural arenas through cultural capital, which manifests itself in 
a specific taste. Habitus, as a structured set of dispositions, reflects how objects of 
consumption are classified, i.e., it norms the way in which individual social groups 
evaluate artefacts. Different lifestyles function, on the one hand, based on common 
norms, and on the other hand, through a competitive relationship with those out­
side the group. Cultural capital, Bourdieu explains, ensures respect based on the 
consumption of products and cultural practices that are demanding and complex 
and can therefore only be consumed by those who have acquired the ability and 
adequate education to do so.
Bourdieu starts from the assumption that lifestyles in consumer societies are 
the expression of class differences, but also the structural heterogeneities of social 
fields that represent the basis of contemporary distinctions. He displaces the taste, 
style, and preferences of certain artefacts from the sphere of personal choice and 
declares them conditioned and predictable. Individuals are not autonomous but are 
carriers of habitus, and habitus is “internalised through primary, family socialisation 
and thus becomes a relatively permanent link between the social position of the 
individual and their taste and lifestyle” (Tomić-Koludrović and Leburić, 2002: 75). 
Cultural capital, understood in this way, cannot be the result of purely individual ef­
forts, but largely depends on family heritage, so taste is a socially constructed fact.

160
Revija za sociologiju | Croatian Sociological Review 54 (2024), 2: 155–178
Although Bourdieu’s theories were criticised for not taking into account the flex­
ibility and diversity of new forms of consumption and lifestyles, his insights were 
also very influential in the analysis of postmodern consumption and the related so­
cial stratification. In his book Distinction, Bourdieu (1984) describes a social group 
that fits well within the postmodern vision of the consumer who strives for the ex­
pression of individuality, freedom, satisfaction, and fulfilment of all kinds of desires. 
It was in the descriptions of these new classes that Bourdieu’s work was usually 
used to develop a postmodern understanding of social differences (Featherstone, 
2007). 
Later studies analyse consumption from the perspective of a late-modern or 
postmodern understanding of social processes and identity formation and are of­
ten critical of structural determinism, especially earlier efforts to understand the 
processes of cultural consumption exclusively from the perspective of social class. 
These approaches, in the spirit of postmodern understanding of social processes, 
reject fixed metanarratives that should unambiguously explain the mechanisms 
and meanings arising from different social processes and advocate the thesis of 
the existence of multiple meanings that are created in the interaction of consum­
ers and artefacts. The advanced development of markets in consumer societies 
implies the availability of increasingly diverse products, and given the promotion of 
the ideology of equal chances, the choice of artefacts and lifestyles becomes “an 
increasingly important criterion of social selectivity” (Tomić-Koludrović and Leburić, 
2002: 85). In this new perspective of understanding identities, individual choice is 
becoming increasingly important, and preoccupation with lifestyle is seen as inde­
pendent of class and age. Instead of being trapped by the determinism of struc­
tural elements, Featherstone (2007) sees the postmodern consumer as a crea­
tive, playful social actor in search of individuality, creativity, freedom, and pleasure. 
Building personal identity through various forms of consumption is a topic that held 
an important place in sociological debates during the 1990s. Ulrich Beck (1992) 
and Anthony Giddens (1991) built their theories on postmodern identity-building 
processes based on the insight that cultural practices and artefacts that people 
choose have the function of a message, that is, they create an image of them­
selves that they want to present to others. In developed consumer societies, from 
the perspective of these authors, identity is not necessarily predefined but chosen 
through the process of picking a series of artefacts and practices that are at one’s 
disposal. It’s not only that contemporary social actors are asked to choose between 
different types of self, but also to “constitute oneself as a self who chooses − a 
consumer” (Slater, 1997: 91). In analysing contemporary consumption practices, 
Beck (1992) argues that class position and family background no longer play such 
a strong role in determining lifestyle and taste, and concludes that it has become

161
Rašeljka Krnić, Sara Ursić: Home Decoration, Aesthetics, and Identity: Exploring Meanings in Dwelling Cultures
impossible to determine one’s lifestyle and identity solely based on class position. 
Furthermore, in considering new forms of cultural practices through the unity of the 
atomised individual, Beck declares stock lifestyles obsolete (Beck, 1994 cited in 
Tomić-Koludrović and Leburić, 2002). 
Building postmodern personal identities becomes a reflexive practice of un­
derstanding one’s own biography as a narrative that can be directed in different 
directions. Individuals demonstrate lifestyles through an integrated set of practices 
that serve as building blocks for maintaining a specific narrative when constructing 
personal identity. Increasingly intensive processes of individualisation reduce the 
impact of meanings produced in the context of group identity, so selection, in a way, 
becomes an obligation, and the responsibility for choice falls on individuals them­
selves (Giddens, 1991). Individuals strategically “make lifestyle a life project and 
display their individuality and sense of style in the particularity of the assemblage 
of goods, clothes, practices, experiences, appearance and bodily dispositions” 
(Featherstone, 2007: 84). Warde (1994) also reflects on this trait when he says 
that “consumer choice is deeply implicated in the process of, respectively, creating 
a reflexive self, constructing a narrative of self, or electing oneself to a shared form 
of identity” (Warde, 1994: 883). What Bauman observes as a significant conse­
quence of this process relates to the mechanisms of domination, which he sees 
as inevitable in the context of the functioning of a consumerist society. Bauman 
discusses how identity in a consumer society is constructed through the goods we 
buy, the lifestyle choices we make, and the brands we associate with. This endless 
cycle of consuming to craft an identity creates a form of dependency. Consumers 
are compelled to constantly renew their identities through new purchases. This cy­
cle traps individuals in a system where they are always chasing the next product or 
trend, driven by the fear of social exclusion or obsolescence. The power dynamics 
are subtle but pervasive, with corporations and marketing systems shaping desires 
and identities (Bauman, 2013). In a detraditionalised and individualised world, indi­
viduals are expected (and expect themselves) to focus much more specifically on 
their self-identity project (Reimer and Leslie, 2004). With greater individual mobil­
ity, the social space becomes more opaque and it is increasingly difficult to draw 
conclusions regarding the objective characteristics of structural differentiation. Life­
style is increasingly a personal matter, and increasingly less a structural category 
(Berger, 1994 cited in Tomić-Koludrović and Leburić, 2002). 
Our position is that we have no predetermined inclination towards any specific 
theoretical perspective. The research findings will indicate the extent to which, and 
in what ways, the practices and meanings participants attribute to the aesthetics of 
their living spaces reflect structural and/or individualistic factors.

162
Revija za sociologiju | Croatian Sociological Review 54 (2024), 2: 155–178
3. METHODOLOGY
The data used for writing this paper were collected as part of the project “Home 
Spaces: Socio-Cultural Aspects of Urban Housing in Croatia”. The project aimed to 
gain insight into everyday housing practices, with special emphasis on the values 
and meanings attached to the construction of the home. This was qualitative re­
search that used the semi-structured interview method. The chosen methodology 
is based on phenomenological research, given that the goal was to thoroughly and 
exhaustively investigate the phenomenon of everyday residential practices through 
the conceptualisation of home space as an origin and a product of social reality. 
Bearing in mind the objectives of the project, which included the analysis of prac­
tices, values, and meanings of housing in the urban context, in order to gain insight 
into how they are connected to structural factors, as opposed to individual choice, 
the qualitative methodology enabled an in-depth analysis that complements the 
much more commonly used quantitative methodology, at least when it comes to 
housing studies in Croatia. 
The implementation of the field research began at the end of March 2021 and 
lasted until May 2021. The interviews were preceded by the construction of an 
interview protocol based on an analysis of the literature relevant to the research. 
The protocol included various thematic sets, including those relevant to this paper, 
related to aesthetics, decoration, and identity in the context of taste. The interviews 
were conducted by two researchers, the authors of this paper. Conversations with 
participants lasted between 60 and 150 minutes. The research was conducted in 
Zagreb on a purposive sample of 15 participants from different types of house­
holds: single, family, and non-family households. All participants were younger 
middle-aged +/- 40 years old, highly educated and employed, with above-average 
incomes. This sample was selected to align with the theoretical concepts used to 
explain specific consumer orientations from contrasting perspectives. These op­
posing theories − structural determinism in Bourdieu versus individual choice in 
Featherstone − are based on research analysing consumer orientations, particu­
larly among highly educated members of the middle class. The interviews were 
conducted in the participants’ apartments/houses. All the subjects provided appro­
priate informed consent. The interviews were transcribed, anonymised, and coded 
using the NVivo qualitative data processing programme. The coding process was 
inductive: first, descriptive codes were constructed, and then they were systema­
tised and critically interpreted. They were analysed using thematic analysis (Boyat­
zis, 1998). Thematic analysis in sociological research enables researchers to gain 
insights into the various perspectives and meanings that participants attribute to 
their experiences and practices. The process of our data analysis consisted of

163
Rašeljka Krnić, Sara Ursić: Home Decoration, Aesthetics, and Identity: Exploring Meanings in Dwelling Cultures
several steps. First, we noted initial ideas and potential themes leading to data 
coding. Coding involved marking key information within the data using codes − 
short descriptions that summarise parts of the text. Our coding was inductive, i.e. 
data-driven. After coding the data, we analysed the codes to identify patterns and 
group them into broader themes.
4. RESULTS
4.1. Relevance of Aesthetics and Decision-making Processes
In order to later discuss the concept of distinction, i.e., the way cultural and aes­
thetic preferences serve as a tool for creating value hierarchies, we will first pres­
ent the results regarding the importance of space aesthetics to our participants. 
The importance of aesthetics, specifically the decorative aspect of home design, 
is evident in the fact that most participants consider it a highly relevant aspect of 
their homes. Apart from the three participants who do not consider the decorative 
aspect of their home design particularly important, everyone else emphasises that 
the dimension of “beautiful” in their home is of particular significance to them. They 
associate the aesthetic experience with the need to spend time in a space that 
is beautiful and pleasant according to their subjective criteria, and some of them 
highlight that the aesthetic characteristics of their home have a very strong impact 
on their mood and emotions. 
I think it is extremely important how you define your space aesthetically be­
cause colours and materials affect how it will look, but also how you are going 
to feel in that space. (Ivor)
From 1 to 10, absolutely 10. Because it’s affecting my mood, this aesthetic 
component. It’s what I look at all day, so if it’s an ugly wall, if it’s something ugly 
around you, if it’s an ugly table, if it’s an ugly wood colour, it’s affecting me a lot, 
it’s depressing me terribly. (Marta)
For Karlo, the relevance of the aesthetics of his living space lies, among other 
things, in its strength to provide refuge from a world that he finds to be marked by 
superficiality and discontinuity:
Our home is our refuge in these times of ugliness, brief information and mes­
sages that we’re moving through, from one brief instant gratification to another 
dose of dopamine that now has to take place in some extremely fast-paced 
cycles. I actually want to create a space that has continuity, and especially con­

164
Revija za sociologiju | Croatian Sociological Review 54 (2024), 2: 155–178
tinuity of some kind of beauty that sustains my inner state and my beauty as a 
human being, etc. (Karlo)
Although participants’ statements indicate that the comfort and functionality of 
space are generally valued more than aesthetics, most of them nevertheless em­
phasise that the real priority is to reconcile all these requirements so that the aes­
thetics do not impair functionality and comfort and vice versa. Those who find it 
important to reconcile the different functions of space notice that such an approach 
requires some effort, time, and commitment. This kind of harmonisation implies 
a process of continuous reflection on space and its possibilities, which is present 
among almost all respondents who have valued the aesthetic dimension of their 
home very highly.
Most participants who consider the aesthetic and decorative dimension of the 
home a very important aspect of the quality of living and, consequently, have as­
pirations to balance comfort, functionality, and aesthetics, design their space very 
thoughtfully, i.e. hardly anything is chosen by chance or inertia. When they talk 
about how they decorated their apartments or certain parts of the apartment, it is 
clear that these are processes that sometimes imply long-term reflection and strat­
egies that have been developed and built over time and through experience. These 
participants talk about a very focused thinking process that, in addition to being a 
source of satisfaction and fulfilment, can be exhausting and time-consuming. 
When we were shopping for the couch, I think I went to see it five times, and 
I was taking the fabric samples home, comparing them to the colour of the 
walls and furniture, thinking whether it is good, if it will fit... I mean, I’m terrible, 
I can’t make up my mind at all. Not that I can’t make up my mind, but I have a 
few variations so I can’t make up my mind between them, so, uh, it’s taking too 
long. (Rada)
Sitting in a chair, thinking about what I want here or there, you know. What could 
possibly be convenient here... And you know, I have this vision, sometimes 
even subconsciously, because I haven’t articulated it yet and then I see this 
piece and then I say − that’s it − this piece needs to come here. (Arsen)
Different strategies applied to the process of interior design sometimes imply both 
risk-balancing and carefully calculated choices. Some of the participants seek 
help on various websites specialising in interior design. Strategic reflection on the 
choice of individual pieces of furniture or some items for Ivor, for example, implies 
a number of decisions that must take into account both functional and aesthetic 
criteria. Such choices, in addition to partly relying on common sense or intuitive

165
Rašeljka Krnić, Sara Ursić: Home Decoration, Aesthetics, and Identity: Exploring Meanings in Dwelling Cultures
reasoning, are also, in his case, based on the acquired knowledge in the field of 
professional design: 
Because of sloping windows, we cannot have a lot of closets − this was our 
problem, where will we put things? The aesthetic decision was to put low cabi­
nets because low cabinets do not block the view and do not disturb the flow of 
the apartment. An architect once told me that, and it seemed logical, but you 
don’t think about it usually. If the furniture is below the waist, you will not visually 
perceive it as something that blocks the view or interferes with the space. (Ivor)
To gain a clearer understanding of the importance our participants place on aes­
thetics and taste in interior design, we also examined whether this topic finds a 
place in family discussions, i.e. whether it is something that is talked about and 
debated. By posing this question, we did not aim to deeply analyse family rela­
tionships or power dynamics that may be reflected in decision-making about aes­
thetics; rather, we intended it simply as an indicator of its relevance. Regarding 
the strategies and decision-making process in multi-member households, the data 
show that, in most cases, one person makes the majority of decisions related to 
the aesthetic identity of the space, and usually that person cares more about the 
aesthetic dimension. However, occasionally there is an equal or similar level of in­
terest but differing visions and approaches, which sometimes lead to conflicts and 
delays in the decision-making, and at other times to more effective solutions. Joint 
decision-making in the household sometimes implies sophisticated communication 
strategies between partners and a certain type of “negotiation” aimed at combining 
and reconciling sometimes initially diverse visions of design solutions.
Filip and I have diametrically opposed views of the decor of the apartment, 
which is a problem. I spent the first two years in enthusiasm but whatever peace 
I found and said − I’m gonna buy it − he refused. And then I gave up. I think we 
both care about how our flat looks, but nobody got what they wanted because 
we have different visions. Filip has his, I have mine that he doesn’t like and then 
we have the status quo. (Mia)
When Maja doesn’t like an idea, and I think it’s great, then I start to insist, and I 
am trying to somehow sell it to her… We start to negotiate, that’s our process. 
She, in my opinion, has great taste and she’s going to suggest something that I 
haven’t thought of. In the end, the decision is mutual. (Ivor)

166
Revija za sociologiju | Croatian Sociological Review 54 (2024), 2: 155–178
4.2. Home Decoration and Taste as a Reflection of Self-Identity
Our data show that most participants consider their home a mirror of their personal­
ity and an integral part of their identity, in the sense that their character, personality, 
and individuality are contained in their aesthetic choices. In her testimony, Luna 
demonstrates how she perceives her home as a medium through which she can 
tell her life story and show what kind of experiences have shaped her life.
I would say you can get a sense of my identity through observing some aspects 
of my apartment... it shows a way of life that’s a little bit different maybe, it 
demonstrates my appreciation for comfort and you can tell the story of my life 
through decorations I displayed. (Luna)
Home decoration as an expression of individuality is also considered important 
by Vanda. For her, home space is an opportunity to demonstrate the individuality 
of a person who is not drowned in the masses. She mentions Ikea1 in a negative 
context, as a metaphor for mass-produced design that is, therefore, impersonal 
and ordinary. Arsen thinks alike, distinguishing between those who design their 
apartments according to the designer’s instructions or by copying trends in maga­
zines on the one hand, and creative, personal demonstrations of character through 
aesthetic choices on the other.
I don’t want my apartment to be Ikea or any other designer clichés. The majority 
of people have similar decorations and styles as if they lack the individuality 
and knowledge to bring to it something of their own. And it’s like they don’t even 
care. This lack of interest is fascinating. (Vanda)
I can always tell how much something is copied from magazines and how much 
personality someone puts into it. And if people have a lot of money, then some­
one will sort it out for them more or less, or they will buy things that they see in a 
magazine, that they like somewhat or think represent them, but it is without per­
sonality, so it will be wow, but still a clean copy of a trend, nothing more. (Arsen)
From almost all the analysed narratives, it is evident that the participants believe 
that the way they have thought about and realised their homes speaks about them 
in a deeper and more significant way, and also that specific aesthetic choices can 
reveal parts of their personality that make them unique and distinguish them from 
others. In addition to believing that space can say something about the more per­
manent character traits of the owner, Karlo shows through his statement that aes­
thetic choices can reflect a change in their current internal states and emotions. For 
1	
One of the world’s largest furniture companies based in the Netherlands.

167
Rašeljka Krnić, Sara Ursić: Home Decoration, Aesthetics, and Identity: Exploring Meanings in Dwelling Cultures
Ružica, too, home space is a mirror of character and a deeply personal expression 
of creativity.
Those little things in the apartment mean a lot. I think my apartment and its 
aesthetics are connected to the notion of who I am. I think most of what I buy, 
especially something that looks eccentric, is a mirror of my inner state. Then 
as my inner state changes, so do the materials, textures, colours, etc. (Karlo)
It’s kind of hard for me to imagine some people living in completely empty apart­
ments, with a mattress on the floor and a closet for suits and a computer in the 
corner. I can’t call it home. I mean, there’s nothing personal about it, you don’t 
see any character. Just like people dress differently or wear different makeup, 
people leave their stamp through the choices of furniture and decorations in 
their home. It’s important to me, what my flat looks like, because it shows what 
kind of person I am. (Ružica)
Those participants who believe that their apartment is in some way above average 
demonstrated the most interest in the aesthetics of their home and devoted the 
most time, attention, knowledge, and focus to it in their previous statements. What 
these participants believe distinguishes their approach to decorating is the demon­
strated commitment and continuity of interest. Although there are rare statements 
in which this is explicitly stated, it can be concluded from the analysis of the overall 
narratives that this group of participants considers that their departure from the av­
erage and those with a lot of money but lacking taste is a consequence of superior 
taste. Furthermore, several participants stated that their apartments are average 
and very similar to the majority when they take into account their immediate sur­
roundings, friends, acquaintances, etc. 
It departs from the average, because of the architecture, but also because of 
the details and the little things that we brought. I put a lot of effort into making 
it nice. (Marta)
I don’t think it’s an average apartment just like I’m not an average guy. (Karlo)
My relatives in Sinj do not have such a decorated apartment, but all my friends 
have a similar approach. (Ružica)
From the analysis of the data, it is evident that a majority of our participants con­
sider their home as a kind of platform that enables them to express individuality 
and creativity, and that the way they have decorated it represents a part of their 
identity and sensibility. Decorating one’s home in a certain way is, for some, very 
important because they understand it as a materialisation of their character and 
their quite subjective and unique emotional states. They believe that their home

168
Revija za sociologiju | Croatian Sociological Review 54 (2024), 2: 155–178
represents who they are. Here, we see how reflexive consideration of the role 
of taste in constructing personal identity aligns with postmodern theories on con­
sumption, where individual choices gain increasing importance. In this context, we 
were also interested in whether our participants cared about what someone else 
thought about how they decorated their home and whether they made a distinction 
concerning who might be making such an assessment. The results show that most 
participants care about how others perceive their space and what impression it 
will make on them. They are also very pleased to hear praise about the décor of 
their home. However, there are some differences between participants − for some 
of them, emphasis was placed on comfort, cleanliness, and neatness, while some 
specifically referred to the aesthetic dimension. Participants who prioritise the aes­
thetic aspect of design emphasised that they care much more about having their 
apartment complimented by someone whose taste they particularly appreciate 
than someone who does not meet their criteria in this regard. From these results, 
we see that taste, or the aesthetics of space, is understood by some participants 
on a symbolic level as a powerful social signal, in contrast to practicality or tidiness. 
It serves as an indicator of social status and belonging to a particular social group, 
where adequate education is assumed, i.e., the necessary level of cultural capital 
that enables the recognition and appreciation of certain symbolic messages. 
Yeah, I care and it makes a difference who is coming. As I appreciate aesthetics, 
I care more about the opinions of people who I think have great taste. (Luna)
It’s important to the ego. It can’t be irrelevant to someone like me. But, you 
know, I definitely don’t care if I’m criticised by a guy whose taste is beige. (Karlo)
From some narratives, it is evident that there is a strong identification with the taste 
they have acquired and that, for them, the process of taste evolution is conscious 
and reflexive. This process takes place under the influence of various factors, in­
cluding the acquisition of specific design knowledge. Some of our participants are 
not particularly interested in acquiring new knowledge or being entertained by spe­
cialised content on architecture and interior design but some of them − mostly 
those whose interest in aesthetics is most strongly expressed − continuously follow 
trends, explore, and acquire knowledge on the topic. They choose such content 
very thoughtfully while demonstrating their taste and aesthetic preferences by fil­
tering the content to which they are exposed. Their statements demonstrate a ten­
dency to create a taste hierarchy where certain approaches are valued as superior 
(“creative and innovative design”) and others as less valuable, so they are called 
“trash” and “pap”. Here, the approach to interior design is understood as a form of 
cultural capital that has the role of stratification – some TV shows are perceived as

169
Rašeljka Krnić, Sara Ursić: Home Decoration, Aesthetics, and Identity: Exploring Meanings in Dwelling Cultures
intended for connoisseurs and those with more sophisticated tastes, while others 
are seen as intended for audiences with less developed tastes and knowledge. 
Interviewer: You are obviously interested in the topic. Do you watch the shows?
Arsen: Yes. But I don’t watch Mirjana Mikulec2 and similar shows.
Interviewer: And you don’t like it why?
Arsen: Well, it’s furniture that you buy in department stores, and it’s been 10−15 
years since I’ve seen that style of minimalism or that quasi-artificial kitsch, the 
new kitsch. It’s all bullshit. I saw a lot better and more creative 20 years ago 
at Super Chanel or BBC Prime, where people did a lot better and cheaper 
things and were much more creative. This show by Mirjana Mikulinec is literally 
like someone decorating your apartment like a hotel room, and I’ve seen hotel 
rooms, so I can tell you these are cheap hotel rooms.
Ivor: We’re watching Grand Designs. We’re not watching those shows on TV 
that have been popular lately because it’s all pap if you ask me. 
Interviewer: What does it mean when you say that everything is pap?
Ivor: The type of Mirjana Mikulec show. I simply find it to be trash. I get that they 
have to do what people want to see, but I just don’t find these solutions and this 
aesthetics interesting because I don’t see anything new.
Exposure to various art forms such as music, films, architecture, books, etc., is 
also recognised by some participants as an important factor in the formation of 
taste regarding home decoration. The following quotes show how the creative pro­
cess of designing a home is, for these participants, intuitively perceived as an 
extension or reflection of deeply subjective emotional experiences arising from the 
encounter with different art forms. The self-identities that are constructed through 
the consumption of certain cultural contents and the taste that is developed in the 
process are reflected in the way the concept of home is considered and realised. 
In accordance with our objectives, we illustrate the interaction between Bourdieu’s 
approach and a more flexible postmodern context, showing that self-identities are 
constructed as an interplay between individualisation and the influence of habitus. 
I think my love for straight lines comes even from music, early Kraftwerk es­
pecially, because to me the sounds are very much related to shapes. Some 
sounds can sound to me like a cone, some like dots, etc. Then, my taste was 
definitely shaped by the Yugoslav architecture aesthetic that I like very, very 
much. (Karlo)
2	
Mirjana Mikulec is the most famous interior designer in Croatia. The public knows her best as the 
host and editor of a show about interior design called InDizajn with Mirjana Mikulec.

170
Revija za sociologiju | Croatian Sociological Review 54 (2024), 2: 155–178
Watching movies, books, music... it all affects choices that we make in space. 
When decorating a space, you’re actually trying to create a feeling, and all of 
these arts I mentioned create a certain feeling and atmosphere, so by play­
ing with all of these segments, you create the atmosphere of your home. It all 
comes together. (Ružica)
4.3. Home Decoration as (Un)inherited Cultural Capital
In addition to being interested in how our participants valued works of art in the 
context of their home decoration, we also wanted to find out whether there was a 
certain continuity in this sense, i.e. whether their parents or grandparents owned 
artistic objects in their homes and, if so, how they valued them. The results, as 
expected, show that the majority of participants who spoke with the most knowl­
edge, passion, and interest about the role of art in their home came from families 
in which art is valued and where the topics relating to art were present during their 
childhood. At the other end of the spectrum, the findings also show continuity, so 
the majority of participants who do not have a particularly developed taste in the art 
domain mostly come from families where art was not of much importance.
My grandmother loved art, she had originals and stuff, and she had plenty of it. 
I spent part of my childhood with her, so that’s probably where that love for art 
came from. In fact, she instilled in me that some things are valuable, and some 
things aren’t. She instilled in me certain criteria. Something that’s handmade 
and stuff like that, not some shit you buy here in Lesnina3. (Arsen)
Parents possess works of art and it matters to them. They keep getting things 
they like. They have artist friends to buy or get stuff from, so it’s important to 
them. (Ivor)
When talking about their parents’ homes in which they used to live when they were 
young, participants mostly, but not exclusively, concluded that in those homes, the 
requirement for functionality was a priority, while aesthetics was of secondary im­
portance. The exception is Maša, whose parents are architects, and whose entire 
life has been devoted to aesthetics and design. Her case is interesting because, 
unlike her parents, who are focused on design, she has not developed an interest 
in decorating her own home. However, her statements show that the transfer of 
taste did happen, although, according to her, this is not evident in the realisation of 
her own home. Apart from various media such as magazines, TV shows, and the 
Internet, several participants emphasised the role of families in developing aes­
3	
Lesnina is one of the leading home furnishing retailers in Croatia.

171
Rašeljka Krnić, Sara Ursić: Home Decoration, Aesthetics, and Identity: Exploring Meanings in Dwelling Cultures
thetic criteria, which indicates that paying special attention to home decoration can 
also be seen as a form of inherited cultural capital.
Well, there are similarities, but they’re not realised in any sense in reality. We 
don’t have different tastes, but they work much more on it, they pay attention 
to it. (Maša)
They talked about it at home, it was their preoccupation, it was a joint activity. 
My interest in aesthetics existed from a young age and then I hung out with 
people who were into design and art, which formed me a lot through high school 
and the beginning of college. (Luna)
Well, I think my parents influenced my taste a lot, and then the magazines and 
the Internet. (Vana)
There’s continuity in taste, that’s for sure. I got some of their stuff. We took some 
things from them that we liked, some paintings. This one (showing) is my grand­
father’s poster, and he made a frame for it. There is a resemblance between us 
in that way. Parents form your style or at least direct it in some way. (Ivor)
Statements related to the coherence of the general style of home decoration be­
tween our participants and their parents indicate a somewhat less pronounced 
continuity than when it comes to the attitudes towards specific elements like art­
works in their homes. Only a few participants noted that there are similarities in the 
style of home decoration between them and their parents. Continuity does not have 
to be purely a transfer of taste, in the sense of significant overlaps in style; rather, 
regardless of differences in style, the relationship to aesthetics itself can also be 
inherited:
From my parents, I inherited the attitude that aesthetics is important. The taste 
is different. (Arsen)
In this case, aesthetics is the sense of taste in Bourdieu’s terms.

172
Revija za sociologiju | Croatian Sociological Review 54 (2024), 2: 155–178
5. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The results obtained in this study suggest that, for most participants, the idea of 
home is much more than a functional, usable dimension of space. Thematic anal­
ysis and insight into the meanings that participants attach to various processes in 
relation to their interaction with the living space reveal the home as a mirror entity 
that simultaneously reflects and produces dimensions of identity. We can say that 
in order for a home to truly be a home, it is not enough to squeeze in a table, bed, 
chairs, washing machine, and toilet; it is necessary to make the space specifically 
personal − a space with which its users will connect on a deeper, emotional level. 
One of the ways in which space is individualised is interior decoration, which is, 
as can be seen from the presented statements, an extremely important aspect of 
constructing a home for most participants. Engagement focused on the aesthetic 
aspect of the design has proved to be important for a number of reasons, including 
the possibility of materialising and objectifying many of the values with which users 
and creators of space identify themselves. It can be said that the way a home is 
made can tell a lot about how someone lives and what is important to them. Al­
though most participants are instinctively inclined to put functionality and comfort 
ahead of aesthetics, in further elaboration of their attitudes they emphasised that 
the decoration of their home is at the very least equally important when deciding 
about the selection and composition of objects and furniture. The way they de­
signed the interior of their homes is a kind of creative statement and, for some, 
represents a process that is never really finished. As shown by our data, combining 
colours, prints, furniture, works of art, and various objects in a unique way enables 
the expression of deeply personal sensibilities and values. As highlighted in the 
theoretical discussion, Featherstone (2007) describes the postmodern consumer 
as a creative, playful social actor in search of individuality, freedom, creativity, and 
pleasure. Cultural practices and artefacts chosen by individuals act as messages, 
forming a self-image they aim to project to others. This self-image − what social 
actors perceive as their personal, individual identity − serves as a basis for distinc­
tion in the Bourdieuian sense. Although this distinction may be more independent 
of class and other structural factors, it becomes a foundation for differentiating 
between various cultures of taste.
The building is cold, reduced to function, and non-personal, while the home is 
deeply personal and exudes intimacy. From the analysed narratives, it is clear that 
aesthetics and decoration are in service of achieving a specific atmosphere. For 
the majority of participants in this research, a home must be warm and must say 
something about its owners. The results also indicate that through the elaboration 
of the visual identity of space, it is possible to articulate various aspects of person­

173
Rašeljka Krnić, Sara Ursić: Home Decoration, Aesthetics, and Identity: Exploring Meanings in Dwelling Cultures
al and collective identities. Apart from the fact that the design of living space can 
serve as an expressive manifestation of self-identity, the design process can also 
reflect the specific dynamics of relationships within the household. Data showed 
that sometimes these processes serve as a platform for cooperation, creation, and 
consolidation of a common identity, and sometimes represent a kind of battlefield, 
a space of conflict or negotiation during the decision-making process. Based on 
their research, Remier and Leslie (2004) also note that the choice of home fur­
nishings is often negotiated, thus embodying a common and agreed identity. Miller 
(1998) draws a very similar conclusion, emphasising that the process of negotiation 
among people emotionally and materially involved in home construction strongly 
determines the type of consumption and the values attached to the purchased arte­
facts. For some women and men who present themselves as egalitarian couples, it 
becomes important to emphasise the commonality of tastes that should reflect the 
compatibility of the couple in love (Miller, 1998).
Sociological research has shown that people belonging to the same social class 
have very similar living rooms (Laumann and House, 1970). Although each home is 
in some way personal and unique, our participants are generally aware of the fact 
that, regardless of the individual expression that can be observed in each space, 
their homes are not too different from the homes of their friends. Our results clearly 
indicate that taste, as Bourdieu claims (1984), serves to create and maintain dis­
tinctions between different social classes. This can be explained on the one hand 
by structural influences – members of the same social class are expected to be 
exposed to similar cultural codes, have similar purchasing power, similar taste, and 
access to artefacts – and on the other hand, by processes of postmodern identity 
shaping, where the demand for individuality, personal expression, and uniqueness 
is emphasised. What further indicates the postmodern character of a specific ap­
proach to aesthetics is the emphasis on fluidity and eclecticism of style, which can 
be found in the narratives of some of our participants. It represents a shift from the 
much stiffer and more framed stylistic expressions of modernism to an approach 
that, in the manner of postmodernism, allows for a kind of “stylistic promiscuity”, 
as long as such “promiscuity” is carefully thought out and perceived as a reflection 
of individuality and an expression of a unique personality. The parallel existence 
of modern and postmodern patterns can also be seen in the results related to the 
transfer of taste. It is safe to conclude that knowledge, as Bourdieu (1984) states 
in his theory of social distinction, serves as a precondition for taste. Although the 
statements of some participants show how taste and attitudes towards aesthetics 
function as inherited cultural capital, i.e. how they are determined by family and 
class structure, the data also reveal how other cultural influences within a complex 
postmodern consumer context shape attitudes and tastes beyond inherited values.

174
Revija za sociologiju | Croatian Sociological Review 54 (2024), 2: 155–178
While the data indicate different forms of acquiring taste and aesthetic sensibility, 
we can nevertheless conclude that, when it comes to attitudes towards aesthetics 
in general, continuity is more strongly emphasised, whereas in terms of specific 
tastes and styles diversification prevails. In other words, parents were univores, 
children are more omnivores in general, but not less in search of distinction, so 
we can say that the maintenance of distinction is in continuity. However, whether 
we talk about a taste that is inherited or a taste that seeks to point to some form 
of emancipation through individuation, the home and its visual identity are instru­
ments of demonstration of a specific lifestyle, values, and belonging to a particular 
social and cultural habitus, i.e. they are mechanisms of distinction. In other words, 
the way we decorate and conceive our space has a symbolic value and conveys 
a certain message. Such a role of design, i.e. specific consumer orientation and 
aesthetic sensibility, is clearly visible in the results related to labelling a certain type 
of taste as non-inventive trash. Cultural competencies, which in this case relate 
to certain knowledge about architecture, design, and art, were most pronounced 
in participants who in their statements emphasised the existence of generational 
transfer of aesthetic values and tastes. In this example, we see how Bourdieu’s 
notion of habitus operates, being reproduced through unconsciously incorporated 
knowledge, orientation, and competence. Although, as we have seen, participants 
very rarely share exactly the same style of decoration with their parents, the results 
show that, despite the absence of stylistic continuity, socialisation within a certain 
type of habitus often results in the inheritance of a certain level of cultural capital, 
in this case, aesthetic values, including attitudes towards works of art. Although in 
the postmodern social context we can talk about consumption that is freer, more 
egalitarian, and more dependent on individual affinities, it is the primary sociali­
sation habitus in which predispositions for consumer orientations are formed, i.e. 
the value system through which artefacts are evaluated, utilised, and imbued with 
symbolic context. 
Home and all its complex manifestations, including the choice of furniture, prints, 
colours, and paintings on the walls are part of a narrative woven into the construc­
tion of personal and collective identities that are intertwined. In this sense, we can 
discuss processes that point to complex mechanisms of production of meanings 
that are not unified. People’s homes are important, but in different ways. Our re­
search refers to the attitudes of younger middle-aged professionals, and members 
of the middle class in the urban context; however, for a better understanding of the 
role of decorative aesthetics in home design and identity construction, future stud­
ies should include members of different social groups with different demographic 
characteristics and a comparative approach.

175
Rašeljka Krnić, Sara Ursić: Home Decoration, Aesthetics, and Identity: Exploring Meanings in Dwelling Cultures
The study contributes to understanding how individuals use home decoration 
aesthetics as a means of self-expression and identity construction. It highlights 
how choices regarding home decoration and aesthetics serve as a reflection of 
individual and collective identities. By integrating Bourdieu’s concepts of cultur­
al capital and habitus with postmodern theories on identity and consumption, the 
study enriches the theoretical discourse on how structural and individual factors in­
fluence tastes and aesthetic preferences in modern societies. The study advances 
sociological and cultural research on the significance of the home by focusing on 
how middle-class individuals use interior design to navigate and construct social 
distinctions. It extends knowledge on how home aesthetics serves as a platform 
for exploring broader social themes, including power dynamics, identity, and social 
stratification.
Finally, regarding limitations, the specific setting of this qualitative study, which 
focuses on younger middle-aged, middle-class professionals in an urban context 
in Croatia, may pose a challenge to the transferability of conclusions to similar 
contexts. Because of this, we have relied on auto-reflexivity regarding the con­
cepts and the applied method, the pronounced contextual setting, transparency, 
and thick descriptions to address and hopefully mitigate this challenge.
FUNDING 
The project Home Spaces: Socio-Cultural Aspects of Urban Housing in Croatia, 
funded by the Institute of Social Sciences Ivo Pilar.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
ETHICAL APPROVAL
The authors declare that institutional ethical approval was not required. However, 
they confirm adherence to the best practices of ethical research. 
DATA ACCESS AND TRANSPARENCY 
Partial access to analytical materials and raw data is available upon request.

176
Revija za sociologiju | Croatian Sociological Review 54 (2024), 2: 155–178
REFERENCES
Bauman Z (2013). Consuming life. New York: John Wiley & Sons
Beck U (1992). Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity. London: Sage
Boccagni P and Kusenbach M (2020). For comparative sociology of home: 
Relationships, cultures, structures, Current Sociology, 68 (5): 595–606. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0011392120927776
Bourdieu P (1984). Distinction: A social critique on the judgment of taste. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press
Boyatzis RE (1998). Transforming Qualitative Information: Thematic Analysis and Code 
Development. London, New Delhi, Thousand Oaks: Sage
Cieraad I (1999). Dutch windows: Female virtue and female vice. In: Cieraad I (ed). At 
home: An anthropology of domestic space. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 31–52
Csikszentmihalyi M and Halton E (1999). Domestic symbols and the self, Cambridge: 
University Press
De Graaf ND (1991). Distinction by consumption in Czechoslovakia, Hungary and the 
Netherlands, European Sociological Review, 7 (3): 267–290. https://doi.org/10.1093/
oxfordjournals.esr.a036605
Featherstone M (2007). Consumer culture and postmodernism. London: Sage
Giddens A (1991). Modernity and Self-Identity. Cambridge: Polity
Gullestad M (1995). Home-Decoration as Popular Culture, In: Jackson S and Moores S 
(eds). The Politics of Domestic Consumption: Critical Readings. London: Prentice Hall, 
319–335
Lamont M and Molnár V (2002). The study of boundaries in the social sciences, Annual Review 
of Sociology, 28 (1): 167–195. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.28.110601.141107
Laumann EO and House JS (1970). Living room styles and social attributes: The patterning 
of material artifacts in a modern urban community, Sociology and Social Research, 54 
(3): 321–342
Lawrence RJ (1987). What makes a house a home?, Environment and Behavior, 19 (2): 
154–168. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013916587192004
Miller D (1998). A Theory of Shopping. Cambridge: Polity Press
Miller D (2001). Home possessions: Material culture behind closed doors. London: Routledge
Reimer S and Leslie D (2004). Identity, consumption, and the home, Home Cultures, 1 (2): 
187–210. https://doi.org/10.2752/174063104778053536
Short JR (1999). Foreword, In: Cieraad I (ed). At home: An anthropology of domestic space. 
Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, ix–x
Silverstone R (1981). The Message on Television: Myth and Narrative in Contemporary 
Culture. London: Heinemann
Slater D (1997). Consumer Culture and Modernity. Cambridge: Polity
Spellerberg A (1995). Lifestyle and quality of life in West and East Germany, Angewandte 
Sozialforschung, 19 (1): 93–106
Tomić-Koludrović I and Leburić A (2002). Sociologija životnog stila: prema novoj metodološkoj 
strategiji. Zagreb: Jesenski i Turk

177
Rašeljka Krnić, Sara Ursić: Home Decoration, Aesthetics, and Identity: Exploring Meanings in Dwelling Cultures
Warde A (1994). Consumption, identity information and uncertainty, Sociology, 28 (4): 877–
898
Warde A (2002). Production, consumption and cultural economy, In: du Guy P and Pryke M 
(eds). Cultural economy: Cultural analysis and commercial life. London: Sage, 185–200
Warde A (2014). After taste: Culture, consumption and theories of practice, Journal of 
Consumer Culture, 14 (3): 279–303. https://doi.org/10.1177/1469540514547828

178
Revija za sociologiju | Croatian Sociological Review 54 (2024), 2: 155–178
Uređenje doma, estetika i identitet: Istraživanje značenja u 
kulturi stanovanja
Rašeljka KRNIĆ  
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2370-433X
Institut društvenih znanosti Ivo Pilar, Zagreb, Hrvatska
raseljka.krnic@pilar.hr 
Sara URSIĆ
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4398-4383
Institut društvenih znanosti Ivo Pilar, Zagreb, Hrvatska
sara.ursic@pilar.hr 
SAŽETAK
Duboko ukorijenjen u osobnom i društvenom identitetu, dom je u posljednja dva 
desetljeća postao sve dinamičnije područje istraživanja unutar društvenih i humanističkih 
znanosti. Koncept doma često služi kao platforma za razumijevanje složenih društvenih 
odnosa između pojedinaca i grupa te otkriva značenja koja proizlaze iz interakcije s 
materijalnom kulturom. U ovom radu koristimo podatke dobivene metodom intervjua kako 
bismo saznali koliko naši ispitanici – mlađi sredovječni stručnjaci srednje klase – cijene 
estetsku dimenziju svog doma i koja joj značenja pridaju. Analiza narativa o estetici, 
ukusu i procesima povezanim s donošenjem odluka omogućila je uvid u to kako su 
određeni stavovi povezani s različitim dimenzijama identiteta naših sudionika. Rezultati 
su pokazali da je kroz oblikovanje vizualnog identiteta prostora moguće artikulirati 
različite aspekte osobnih i kolektivnih identiteta. Iako dobiveni podaci pokazuju kako 
ukus i stav prema estetici funkcioniraju kao naslijeđeni kulturni kapital, također otkrivaju 
kako drugi kulturni utjecaji u složenom postmodernom potrošačkom kontekstu oblikuju 
stavove i ukuse izvan izravno naslijeđenih vrijednosti.
Ključne riječi: 	 uređenje doma, estetika, identitet, potrošnja, kulturni kapital