The Authoritarian Personality, 50 Years Later:
What Lessons Are There for Political Psychology?
John Levi Martin
Department of Sociology
Rutgers—The State University of New Jersey
Adorno, Frenkel-Brunswik, Levinson, and  Sanford’s The  Authoritarian Personality is
probably the most deeply flawed work of prominence in political psychology. The
methodological, procedural, and substantive errors of this study are well known, but they
are frequently simply attributed to poor methodological judgments, issues of scaling (such
as response set), or Freudian theories that legitimated circular interpretations. But a more
fundamental bias arose from the attempt to empirically verify the existence of a “type” of
person whom the researchers thought dangerous and with whom they did not empathize.
This attempt involved two dangerous procedures: (1) the fusion of nominalist research
procedures (in which empirical results were used to type respondents) with a realist
interpretation of types (in which some people “just were” authoritarians and others not),
and (2) a theoretically rich critique of the authoritarians and a lack of interest in the
psychodynamics of liberals. This combination led to an intrinsically biased interpretive
project that could not help but accumulate damning evidence about authoritarians. These
subtler problems have haunted contemporary work in political psychology that avoids the
methodological problems of Adorno et al.; Altemeyer’s work on authoritarianism, which
not only is free from  the defects of the Adorno et al.  study but also involves some
methodologically exemplary experiments, is similarly distorted by asymmetries. The same
fundamental problems seem to be at the heart of the weaknesses of the theory of symbolic
racism to which critics have pointed. Political psychologists should regard The
Authoritarian Personality as a cautionary example of bias arising from the choice of
methodological assumptions.
KEY WORDS: authoritarianism, authoritarian personality, Adorno et al., symbolic racism.
The Authoritarian Personality, by Theodor Adorno, Else Frenkel-Brunswik,
Daniel J. Levinson, and R. Nevitt Sanford (1950), was perhaps the first major work
in political psychology to combine theoretical claims with methods similar to those
Political Psychology, Vol. 22, No. 1, 2001
1
0162-895X © 2001 International Society of Political Psychology
Published by Blackwell Publishers, 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA, and 108 Cowley Road, Oxford, OX4 1JF, UK.

now used in the social sciences. In the 50 years since it was published, its influence
in political psychology has waned greatly. But for this very reason the work is worth
renewed attention, for the exaggerated nature of its interpretive flaws makes it an
ideal site to identify standard forms of distortion that enter into political psychol-
ogy, distortions that can be found in greatly attenuated form in contemporary
researches. I assert that the fundamental weaknesses of The Authoritarian Person-
ality (hence TAP) came from its attempt to empirically validate a typology that
made categorical distinctions between types of persons, and that similar problems
may affect much more empirically grounded studies; consequently, the strictures
recently proposed by Tetlock (1994) may not prove sufficient to prevent the
degeneration of political psychology into politicized psychology. Some of the same
interpretive problems can be seen in Bob Altemeyer’s recent work on authoritari-
anism, despite the methodological sophistication of his approach and his efforts to
the contrary. Finally, these same basic problems seem to be at the heart of the
weaknesses in the theory of symbolic racism, to which critics have drawn attention.
The Study
Throughout this paper, I will refer to the authors of TAP (Adorno, Frenkel-
Brunswik, Levinson, and Sanford) as AFLS, although different portions were
written by different persons. While the main argument of AFLS is well known to
political psychologists, it may be useful to briefly state their theoretical claims and
their substantive vision, as summarized in the book’s conclusion:
A basically hierarchical, authoritarian, exploitative parent-child relation-
ship is apt to carry over into a power-oriented, exploitively dependent
attitude towards one’s sex partner and one’s God and may well culminate
in a political philosophy and social outlook which has no room for
anything but a desperate clinging to what appears to be strong and a
disdainful rejection of whatever is relegated to the bottom . . . [and] the
formation of stereotypes and of ingroup-outgroup cleavages. Convention-
ality, rigidity, repressive denial, and the ensuing break-through of one’s
weakness, fear and dependence are but other aspects of the same funda-
mental personality pattern, and they can be observed in personal life as
well as in attitudes toward religion and social issues. (p. 971)
The central project of TAP was to administer scales designed to tap ethnocentric,
authoritarian, or pre-fascist attitudes; to examine those high or low on these scales;
and to show that those high-scoring persons (henceforth referred to as Highs) did
in fact have the other components of the alleged authoritarian syndrome, whereas
low scorers (henceforth Lows) had the other components of the alleged anti-
authoritarian syndrome, and that the histories of Highs and Lows were compatible
with the genetic account given above. Most important was a demonstration that
those high on the authoritarian scale were also ethnocentric, for the authoritarianism
2
Martin
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

scale was originally intended as an indirect measure of ethnocentrism, given that
anti-Semites and racists might not reveal their true feelings.
These theses had a remarkable impact on social psychology and what we
would now refer to as political psychology (see Titus & Hollander, 1957), and they
still resurface both in specific studies (e.g., Lewis & Maltby, 1995) and in more
general discussions of the relation between power and personality (e.g., Chancer,
1992, p. 15). Some recent reviews of the theoretical underpinnings have been
positive (e.g., Baars & Scheepers, 1993; Hopf, 1987; D. Smith, 1996, pp. 213–217;
M. Smith, 1997; Stone, Lederer, & Christie, 1993), and it has been used in studies
of political psychology in South Africa (Duckitt, 1983a, 1983b; Heaven, 1983,
1984), Turkey (Neel, Tzeng, & Baysal, 1983), and the former Soviet Union
(McFarland, Ageyev, & Abalakina-Paap, 1992). And, of course, the main theoreti-
cal claims live on, although criticized and refracted, in the work of Young-Bruehl
(1996).
The claims of TAP were never accepted without controversy and critique. But
aside from the initial debates in the social sciences, most critiques have dealt with
largely peripheral issues. As Billig (1977) and Smith (1997) have noted, TAP is
often treated simply as a 900-page test manual for the F-scale. Accordingly,
critiques of AFLS’ theory have often focused on this scale and largely ignored the
clinical data from which the theoretical claims were derived. (For some methodo-
logical critiques, see Ray, 1984, 1985, 1988a.) As these methodological critiques
are well known, they will not be reviewed here; the best treatment is that of Hyman
and Sheatsley (1954, e.g., pp. 72–73).1
Methods of Analysis: Typologizing the Typologizers
What the critics did not focus on was AFLS’ attempt to construct a psychody-
namic theory that would apply to types of persons in the general population—in-
deed, a recent review in these pages (Smith, 1997, p. 160) proposed that this attempt
constitutes the main contribution of TAP. In contrast, I will argue that this was its
undoing; in particular, AFLS attempted to construct a typology that would “get at”
phenomena they believed they knew to take place, leading to an asymmetric
interpretive strategy that was invisible to the authors. Much critical attention has
been given to the F-scale, and less to the fact that AFLS used it to categorize
respondents as Highs and Lows, eliminating those in the  middle from most
analyses. In so doing, AFLS, like all such researchers, were using a nominalist
1 Critics also pointed to the problem of AFLS making statements about the form of belief (e.g., rigidity)
and supporting these with data on belief content (Durrheim, 1997, especially p. 633; Shils, 1954; cf.
Dorn & Long, 1972; Lichter & Rothman, 1982; Rothman & Lichter, 1978, p. 545). Yet this line of
critique—reasonable as it is—necessarily leads to the paradoxical position of judging those who
strongly believe that all should be open-minded to be more ideologically rigid than those who weakly
believe that there is only one true answer to every problem.
The Authoritarian Personality
3
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

definition of Highs—a High is a subject in the top quarter of the F- or E-scale
distribution. These Highs were then treated as a type; they were not merely higher
on these scales, they were Highs, and they were psychodynamically different from
Lows. To demonstrate this, AFLS used various other data, such as thematic
apperception tests (TATs), projective questions, and clinical interviews covering
the respondents’ life histories. These methods were consciously combined so as to
best present a typology of authoritarians and non-authoritarians, using two exem-
plars, a High (“Mack”) and a Low (“Larry”).
Many wits have begun talks by saying, “There are two classes of people in the
world, those who divide people into two classes and those who do not. Among the
former . . .” Like other good jokes, this one stays with us because it cuts a bit too
close to home. More particularly, in political psychology and social psychology,
there has been a tradition of claims that agree (to some extent) that there are two
classes of people in the world, those who divide people into two classes and those
who do not. The former are said to be intolerant of ambiguity and prone to various
intellectual and personality shortcomings. But as the researcher has begun by
dividing up the world into two classes,the researcher seemsplaced in the “problem”
class.
AFLS noted that stepping into this paradoxical position increased the dangers
of their theoretical reliance on typology, which they understood would be greeted
with suspicion by most social scientists in the first place. Their response was to rest
their case on the realism of the basic typology, appealing to
the increasing rigidity according to which our society falls into two more
or less crude opposing camps. . . . The critique of typology should not
neglect the fact that large numbers of people are no longer, or rather never
were, “individuals” in the sense of traditional nineteenth-century philoso-
phy. . . . There is reason to look for psychological types because the world
in which we live is typed and “produces” different “types” of persons.
(pp. 746–747; emphasis added)
Of course, the “fact” that types existed in the world did not imply that the types as
empirically constructed and theoretically interpreted by AFLS—that is, the types
resulting from their nominalist definition given the F-scale—were the same as the
actually existing types. In response to this, AFLS merely indicated that they felt
that their typology had “hit upon something.”
But this assumption justified AFLS then fusing their nominalist typology to
the hypothesized realist typology. This fusion then led them to an asymmetric
research process, which was necessarily an agonistic attempt to “trap” the Highs
in two senses. In the first sense, AFLS hoped to trick Highs into revealing their
morally objectionable characteristics, which they would not directly state (the
whole reason for the reliance on the supposedly indirect F-test instead of a direct
test of racism and ethnocentrism); in the second sense, they hoped to successfully
place some of the respondents in the “authoritarian” category, despite their best
4
Martin
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

attempts to wriggle out.Here, psychoanalytic theoryserved AFLSwell injustifying
their dismissal of all countertheoretical evidence as some form of “denial.” How-
ever, psychoanalytic theory was not necessary for such dismissal.
This is because in their typological efforts, AFLS concentrated on one of the
two types and left the other largely (though not wholly) residual, an asymmetry
they attempted to justify by insisting that “high scorers are generally more ‘typed’
than the lower scorers” (p. 751). Because their theoretical focus was on authori-
tarians, their procedures were designed to pick up evidence of those psychody-
namic deficits of authoritarians. Unless “liberals” had the same pattern of
psychodynamic deficits (should there be any) as authoritarians, they would tend to
be given a clean bill of health. These two facets of AFLS’ approach—a fusion of
nominalist procedures and realist interpretations, and an asymmetric definition of
one type as “marked”—led them to “set up the board” in a way necessarily leading
to confirmation bias. Specifically, it led to differential interpretive strategies by
which they imputed inconsistency to the Highs as opposed to listening to them, and
were unable to see the disconfirmation present in their data. I first demonstrate that
AFLS never considered it part of their research to actually take seriously the views
expressed by Highs, then that they in fact dismissed statements made by Highs
when it furthered their theoretical agenda, and finally that the statements of Lows
were never subjected to critique, even when it was warranted.
The Imputation of Contradiction and Inconsistency
AFLS seemed to have no reservations when it came to attributing inconsis-
tency to all those who simply held different opinions than did they themselves, and
hence had no hesitation in correcting their subjects as to the implications of their
beliefs. Thus, a rather consistently Stalinist subject who hated Hoover, tolerated
Roosevelt, admired Soviet Russia, and criticized the United States for not stopping
the fascists sooner was introduced as an example of the “amazing irregularity” one
would find in the political ideology of Highs.2 As a result, instead of actually
understanding the political ideology of those they categorized as Highs, AFLS
worked to dismiss it as phony. Most famously, AFLS denied that authoritarians
might actually simply be conservatives, and hence motivated by age-old political
values as opposed to the new pathologies of mass society. They introduced the idea
of “pseudoconservatism” to explain the Highs’ combination of conservative moral
2 This subject was also somewhat anti-Semitic—which presumably AFLS assumed could not coexist
with admiration of the Soviets. Similarly, AFLS (p. 679), analyzing a woman who claimed that she
was a Democrat because “The Democrats have tried to give the working class a break,” opined, “The
phoniness of this subject’s proposed progressiveness comes out in the section on minorities where she
proves to be a rabid anti-Semite.” Again, a tolerant religious Low who disapproved of Gandhi’s
radicalism must be inconsistent, given that AFLS were tolerant and also approved of Gandhi: “Her
church affiliations make it impossible for her to draw the political consequences from her tolerance
idea” (p. 742).
The Authoritarian Personality
5
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

values and a desire for change (p. 50), with, of course, the elaboration that “the
psychological structure that corresponds to pseudoconservatism is conventionality
and authoritarian submissiveness on the ego level, with violence, anarchic im-
pulses, and chaotic destructiveness in the unconscious plane” (pp. 675–676). Real
conservatism, in contrast, was held to be a respect for the old orders without such
desire for change.3
But it was not simply in political views that the Highs were determined to be
bogus—it was in every characteristic that might imaginably be seen as having
morally positive or neutral valence. Thus, the Highs were said to possess a
“pseudo-masculinity” because they had “less admission of passivity” (p. 428).
High women also had pseudo-femininity, in contrast to the outright discomfort with
the feminine role experienced by many Lows. In turn, we also see the introduction
of “pseudodemocratism,” “pseudopatriotism,” “pseudointellectuality,” and “semi-
erudition,” and AFLS commented that the term “pseudoconservatism” can “often
be replaced by pseudoliberal and even pseudoprogressive” (p. 682), demonstrating
that the essence was in the “pseudo.” Now there are many problematic aspects to
the theoretical proliferation of ersatz ideologies, but the most striking is the simple
refusal of AFLS to listen to the Highs. This turns out to have been a crucial part of
AFLS’ interpretive strategy.
How to Prove Theories and Falsify Respondents
In TAP, interpretation generally came down to the coding of open-ended
responses to, for example, depth interviews: Did a response indicate the personality
theoretically attributed to Highs, or did it indicate that of a Low? The many coding
problems of TAP are well known, and consequently will not be recounted here.
What is important to bear in mind is that for almost all of the analyses, the coders
either knew who was High and who was Low, or had coded an entire interview
(see AFLS, p. 530; Hyman & Sheatsley, 1954, pp. 77, 81, cf. p. 89, note 25). Thus,
even when a coder did not “see” that a subject was a “High,” he or she seems to
have made a heuristic decision for the purposes of coding an interview, leading to
a striking non-independence of codings across items (Christie, 1954, p. 187).
As a result, the same statements received dramatically different interpretations
depending on who had made them. For example, AFLS argued that Highs have to
lean on external authorities to tell them what is right and wrong, as opposed to
possessing “genuine, intrinsic values and standards” like Lows. Here is a typical
example: “If you don’tharm anybody else, it’s all right. .. . If you break a man-made
law, it’s OK if you don’t harm anybody else—the law is made to protect people.”
3 However, a respondent who blatantly affirmedthat he hadn’t forgiven Russia, Mexico,not even France
“for her revolution” and that “I still believe in the Old Order” (meaning the ancien regime) was also
judged only pseudo-conservative (p. 679); it is hard to imagine what would be taken as genuine
conservatism!
6
Martin
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

But this was not an example from a Low, it was an example from a High, and was
considered evidence supporting AFLS’ claims, despite the clear sense that the
subject had the ability to make internal decisions that override rules.
Of course, sometimes the data were not ambiguous enough to be stretched to
fit a point. In these cases, AFLS simply ignored what falsifies their scheme. Most
instructive is the treatment of the exemplary cases, Mack (High) and Larry (Low).
These cases, chosen to illustrate the power of the F-scale scoring system, instead
defeated it, leaving AFLS with one of two possible logical conclusions: Either the
scales did not measure authoritarianism, or Mack was not more authoritarian than
Larry. AFLS, however, avoided either of these concessions.
Instead, they concluded that the real problem was with Mack—he was simply
not responding correctly. In particular, Mack did not agree with the following:
“What this country needs is fewer laws and agencies, and more courageous,tireless,
devoted leaders whom the people can put their faith in.” Commented AFLS, “It
seems likely that for some of the truly submissive subjects, like Mack, the item is
too open, comes too close home [sic], so that in responding they go contrary to their
strongest feeling” (p. 275).
This pattern of dismissal was used in the interpretation of the “clinical data”
as well. In brief, AFLS refused to believe anything Mack said that did not fit their
scheme—they simply erased these data and replaced them with those that they
would have liked to see. Mack, asked what he admired about his father, replied
“Mostly, his attention to us kids was very admirable” (p. 788) (because “Father
spent all of his time with us after mother died”); AFLS instead claimed that Mack’s
father was silent and distant—putting “distant” in quotation marks (p. 795) as if it
were Mack’s word, although it was not—and concluded:
In summary, it seems that the nearest we can come to an estimate of what
the father was like in reality is to say that he was a defeated man who, in
an authoritarian manner, held up conventional moral standards for his son
without being able to show by example that adherence to these standards
actually led to worthwhile ends; after the death of his wife he seems to
have tried to take over some of the maternal functions in his relations with
his children but because of his own personality problems he was unable
to be understanding or affectionate toward his son. (p. 792)
None of this is found in Mack’s interview, except that the father “tried” to take
over “some” maternal functions (although Mack implied he succeeded). AFLS
knew this, so they dismissed Mack’s words: “Mack’s references to his father’s
devotion and attention can be better understood as expressions of a wish rather than
as statements of what the father was like in actuality” (p. 795).
Except for the intolerance of ambiguity, AFLS’ analysis of Larry was quite
different. His basic materialism (supposedly a High attribute) was recast as his
openness—“his readiness to accept the material help which he expects will be
offered to him.” He identified with his mother, “in crucial contrast to Mack . . . who
The Authoritarian Personality
7
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

cannot possibly come close to or be identified with the mother . . . because she is
conceived as too weak or inconsequential” (pp. 812–813). (Of course, as we recall,
the problem for Mack was that she was too dead.)
Despite several portions of Larry’s interview that must have served as red flags
to such Freudian theorists,4 his comments were never subjected to the critical and
dismissive scrutiny that Mack’s were. It seems that Lows were in effect handed a
“Get Out of Neurosis Free” card, as can be seen in AFLS’ interpretation of Larry’s
view of gender relations, which were plainly stereotyped, superficial, morally rigid,
unashamedly egotistical, and put adherence to conventional morality above inner
feeling: all High traits.
Here is Larry: “I feel a girl should remain a virgin until 21 or 22 anyway . . .
if she is a career girl or doesn’t want to get married, then an affair with an unmarried
man is O.K. if they keep it quiet and secluded so the moral standards of others are
not lowered.” “I lost respect for the women I slept with. I know that’s selfish, but
I guess that’s the way most fellows are.” His ideal wife “should have a good
reputation, be attractive, not taller than I, nor too short, say 2 or 3 inches shorter….”
(pp. 810–811). Similarly, Larry’s description of a good husband and father fits
AFLS’ materialist-succorance pattern far better than does any of Mack’s state-
ments: “[The ideal husband] should give her happiness, through security, home,
car, enjoyment and entertainment; money to travel, and so on. He should be a good
father to the children, shouldn’t give the wife any worries; he shouldn’t get drunk,
and he should be faithful to his wife. He should be devoted to his children, give
them the proper clothing, food, education,” etc. (p. 811).
Projecting Projection
These biases in interpretation were, not surprisingly, greatest where there was
most room for free play, namely in the codings of the life histories and the TATs.
But because of the very flexibility with which AFLS reversed the actual differences
between Mack and Larry, even to the point of attributing to Mack those pathologi-
cal characteristics found only in Larry’s TATs (see, e.g., pp. 531–540), it is difficult
to retrieve any principles of AFLS’ interpretive strategy. More instructive is their
treatment of structured projective questions.Such projective questionsare designed
to be analyzed according to the assumption that what the respondent says is not an
answer to the literal question posed by the experimenter, but an answer to the
question, “Who are you in your heart of hearts?” The idea behind projective
questions is reasonable, and one can easily imagine answers that would have to be
interpreted projectively, because of their specificity and detail (e.g., when asked
“What is the worst crime someone can commit?,” answering “Gut and clean every
4 “[My mother’s] main threat was not ‘I’ll spank you,’ but ‘I’ll tell your father.’ Her own spankings
were so mild that we almost enjoyed them. . . . I still have unpleasant dreams. . . . One was that my leg
was getting amputated” (p. 810).
8
Martin
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

last stockbroker in the NYSE like a fish before burning the whole place down”).
But not all answers seem to be projective, and AFLS in fact did not treat all as
projective.
Although AFLS—like other researchers of the time—had no clear standard to
determine when an answer was projective and when it was not, they were not
without a rule of thumb, for they simply seem to have refrained from interpreting
Lows’ responses as projective. And far from being an occasional deviation from a
procedure reasonable in principle, such biases were an essential part of their use of
the projective questions. Rather than deductively testing whether projective tests
did in fact reveal the psychologies imputed to Highs and Lows, AFLS simply
examined the data from a subsample of each group and came up with post hoc
categories  that could best be used to pigeonhole persons (p. 567). And the
interpretations that went along with these categories were such as to build into the
very coding scheme the principle that High answers were projective and Low
responses were not. When a High like Mack answered that the worst crimes one
could commit were murder and rape, he would be (and was) assumed to be
projecting his own desires into the response; hence, Highs wanted to rape and kill,
possessing personality elements that are “relatively primitive, destructive, unso-
cialized” (pp. 568, 593–594). But when a Low answered that the worst crime would
be “racial persecution and the enforced militarism of a country during peacetime,”
AFLS did not conclude that he had barely suppressed racist and fascistic urges, nor
when another answered “cruelty to helpless things” was he suspected of repressing
his own sadism. The coding manual said otherwise.
Now it is indeed true that the psychoanalytic theory held by AFLS supported
such differential interpretations. Yet it is not the case that their analytic approach
was a foregone conclusion upon embracing psychoanalytic theory. First, although
the particular version of psychoanalytic theory embraced by AFLS justified treat-
ing the claims of authoritarians with skepticism, if AFLS indeed knew a priori that
(nominally defined) Highs were authoritarians, the entire research project would
be a waste of time. Their methods, then, assumed what they had set out to prove.
Further, nothing in the fundamentals of psychoanalytic theory could be used to
break this vicious circle, nor lend support to the general contention that Highs (but
not Lows) use psychological defenses of repression and projection.5
5 The particular schools of psychoanalytic theory embraced (to different degrees) by AFLS seem to have
been, on the one hand, the Frankfurt interpretation of working-class authoritarianism of Fromm (see
Samelson, 1986) and on the other hand, Henry Murray’s attempt to make a scientifically acceptable
version of psychoanalysis, a project that, Sanford (1986, p. 210) recalled, he swallowed “hook, line,
and sinker.” Regarding the Frankfurt half, one may reasonably say that rather than the adoption of the
The Authoritarian Personality
9
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Bad Traits or Good Confessions?
In sum, AFLS treated the answers of Lows differently, and this is because—to
speak  somewhat  crudely—they were  only hunting  Highs, and so only those
responses were subject to a disbelieving critique. No parallel effort was made for
the responses of Lows, so the least believable responses (in hindsight) were treated
as the most credible. The Lows were allowed to choose their presentation of self,
and AFLS gave them “face.” This reached its acme in a differential interpretation
strategy by which anything “good” said by a High (but not by a Low) was evidence
of the suppression of its opposite, and anything “bad” said by a Low (but not by a
High) was taken as evidence of a healthy acceptance of one’s shortcomings.
Negative evidence, as a consequence, could not appear (cf. Hyman & Sheatsley,
1954, p. 99). Thus, Larry stressed self-interest in his politics and getting ahead,
whereas Mack “stresses the conventional ideal of unselfishness in order, we may
suppose, to disavow his underlying interest in power” (p. 49). After claiming that
Highs are interested in status when choosing their friends (as opposed to their
“intrinsic worth”), AFLS pointed out that
low-scoring subjects, on the other hand, not only tend to emphasize the
intrinsic worth in their friends but tend explicitly to deny the importance
of status. There may be, in some of these cases, an underlying concern
with status, but the fact that they disclaim it shows that they have at least
some inclination to resist conventionalism. (pp. 418–419)
Lows, apparently, do not “deny,” they only “disclaim.”
AFLS, of course, believed that Highs are actually more likely to use denial as
a psychological defense (p. 595). But they had no independent way to ascertain
whether this is in fact the case, because their methodological approach was to
discount statements of denial when they were made by Highs but take them as
legitimate information when they were made by Lows. AFLS did not simply count
explicit denial as denial (a defensible if dangerous tactic for the psychoanalytically
inclined); they counted the absence of corroboration of their hypotheses (by Highs)
as itself denial, contrasted to the healthy “admission” of these same (supposedly
High) traits by Lows. Indeed, all sexual inadequacies, pathological relations with
parents, and “homosexual tendencies” confessed to by Lows (but not Highs) were
Frommian perspective explaining AFLS’ interpretations (let alone excusing them), this adoption itself
calls for explanation. It was certainly just as plausible from an orthodox Freudian perspective to expect
greater repression and neuroses among (as it turned out) middle-class persons with weak identification
with the same-sex parent, more sexual difficulties, and more leanings toward homosexuality than
among working-class persons with strong same-sex parent identification and greater sexual satisfac-
tion. Regarding the American half, it is worth emphasizing that Murray’s (1938, p. 388) chief concern
was that, even though some analysts might indeed possess great insight, “this, however, does not make
science.”Any appeal to analytic expertise in determining when a statement had tobe read as its opposite
violated the core principles of Murray’s approach.
10
Martin
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

taken—despite the Freudian orientation of the researchers—not as evidence of
neuroses but of  the healthy  democratic spirit  of the Lows,  because  of  their
“frankness” (pp. 394, 595, 796). It was simply assumed that Highs had all of these
in spades, but kept their hand to themselves. Instead of “admitting” their sexual
passivity as did Lows, Highs seemed inordinately proud of their prowess or
popularity. AFLS did not appreciate this frankness—instead, they condemned
these “crude and unsocialized sex impulses” (pp. 396, 426, cf. p. 952).
About Face
We have seen the critique to which AFLS subjected the responses of Highs.
Now let us briefly examine, as a comparison, the kid gloves with which they treated
the answers of Lows. The contemporary reader is amazed at the frequency with
which Low respondents gave answers that seem bizarrely inappropriate, as they
took a wide variety of questions as opportunities to demonstrate their good, liberal,
and tolerant perspective to the analysts, producing responses regarding the elimi-
nation of racial prejudice or the fight against fascism no matter what the question.
For example, in response to the question on hard-to-control desires, Mack gave the
simple response  “anger,” while Larry gave the  response  “When  someone is
persecuted unjustly, or to see a Negro serviceman endure unjust discrimination and
prejudice” (note that there is nothing here having to do with desires or self-control).
Low answers such as “To lash out at those people who voice an attitude of racial
discrimination or an attitude of a dishonest intellect” and “Telling people about
fallacies in our economic system” were taken neither as projection nor as self-
promotion, but as indicative of (and coded as) “a principled opposition to fascism,
militarism, discrimination, suppression, exploitation,  autocracy, and  the like”
(pp. 551, 593).
Not only were AFLS uninterested in criticizing the motivation of the Lows,
they positively went out of their way to give face even to those Lows who had not
attempted such a self-presentation. For example, discussing mentally disturbed
Lows, some of whom during the war “suffered acute conflict about the problem of
participation,” AFLS emphasized that “this was not primarily because of fear of
physical injury or death but because of ideological reasons and a horror of being
forced to kill.” But their “illustrative case” sought psychological help because of
anxiety and “several fears—of the dark, of physical injury, and of graveyards and
mental institutions.” His political ideas, in contrast, were “quite uncertain” (p. 953).
The differential interpretation therefore functioned, as Goffman (1959) might say,
as a protective strategy extended to those taken to be part of AFLS’ “team.”
Indeed, one of the characteristics AFLS repeatedly mentioned in their analysis
of the Lows was their self-insight—that is, their capacity and willingness to enter
as co-researchers, not subjects. Nor were AFLS misled to see the Lows as potential
co-researchers (cf. Rothman & Lichter, 1978), since later research found the
F-scale’s predictive power to be highest when it came to an item AFLS never
The Authoritarian Personality
11
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

considered—namely, actual willingness to participate in social research: Lows are
much more likely to volunteer for psychology experiments than are Highs (Rosen,
1951). AFLS might have saved a great deal of expense in creating an indirect test
of the “bad” personality by simply asking, “Who will come with me into the next
room?”6
I began with the somewhat tired joke about the two classes of persons, one of
which divides persons into two classes. But there is perhaps a more apposite
division: Kingsley Amis, in his wicked satire on academic life Lucky Jim, has a
character speak of the “two great classes” of persons in the world, “those I like”
and “those I do not like.” For AFLS, it is clear that these translated into Lows and
Highs, and that this affected their strategy of interpretation.Little thought was given
to a critique of those answers that seemed likable, and no credence was given to
those from the unlikable.7
That Was Then, This Is Now
The serious flaws in AFLS’ research strike us as so obvious that we would
assume that there is no danger of their repetition. But even though times have
changed, and methodological rigor has improved, social scientists still need to deal
with problems that objectively involve high stakes, deep divides, and wide injus-
tice. We are also likely to feel that we are in the possession of decent templates for
at least the beginnings of an approach to these problems, and are hence likely to be
more skeptical of the associative patterns put forward by those whom we deem
wrong (if not morally implicated) than we are of those with whom we tend to agree.
AFLS embraced psychoanalytic theory, but such theory is not necessary to dismiss
the words of some (but not all) of our respondents, because we (quite reasonably)
believe that not all responses can be taken at face value. But if our approach shares
AFLS’ attempt to “catch” one type in a morally loaded typology, then no meth-
odological sophistication will necessarily protect us from asymmetric—and hence
flawed—analyses.
To demonstrate this, I now turn to a contemporary analysis of authoritarianism,
certainly the most credible accumulation of findings to date, namely the careful
(and always wonderfully written) work of Bob Altemeyer. Although Altemeyer
has made none of the methodological errors of AFLS and has produced many solid
empirical findings, his overall interpretations still necessarily suffer from the
6 The close link between the interpretation of responses and “team feeling” is humorously demonstrated
in the treatment of responses to the projective question “What great people do you admire most?”:
Answers falling into the category “Social scientists, liberal-radical political figures” were considered
a Low response. Although this is no less sensible than any of the other codings, it would be no worse
to include a Likert “feeling thermometer” on Theodor Adorno, or to simply ask “How much do you
like me?”
7 Compare Christie’s (1993, p. 88) fascinating admission of his ability to categorize subjects as Highs
versus Lows on the basis of which ones he liked.
12
Martin
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

problems that arise when one fuses a nominalist definition of types to a realist
interpretation, given that one has a theoretical interest in only one of the two types.
Once again, the board is set in such a way that the winners and losers are clear from
the start.
Altemeyer’s Starting Points
Altemeyer’s criticism of AFLS’ procedures—and their Freudian justifications
for differential interpretation—is among the best in the literature (see Altemeyer,
1981, pp. 10, 25, 36–39, 48, 52–55, 141, 259; 1988, pp. 136–137). Yet Altemeyer
(1988, p. 329; 1996, p. 45) himself starts from a duly modified version of AFLS’
“ ‘pre-Fascist’ personality,” restricted to the combination of authoritarian aggres-
sion, authoritarian submission, and conventionalism [“I have spent over twenty-
five years trying to understand what Nevitt Sanford and his associates first uncovered
because, like them, I suspect ‘It can happen here’ ” (1996, pp. 282–283)].
To this end, Altemeyer has produced a balanced scale—the right-wing authori-
tarianism (RWA) scale—that performs far better than the fatally flawed F-scale,
and he uses this to categorize respondents into High and Low types, as well as to
look at the correlation of RWA score and various other responses. As a result of
his careful work, Altemeyer has produced some extremely interesting and convinc-
ing findings that seem beyond reasonable criticism. For one, High undergraduates
have more trouble remembering material they have heard (at least when the topic
is one that they may not like very much), even though their grades tend not to be
lower than those of Lows. Highs tend tobe influenced intheirjudgment ofsomeone
else’s morality by how similar that person is to them in terms of responses to the
RWA scale, although Lows are not. Further, RWA scores correlate with sentences
given to prisoners in hypothetical vignettes, and with the voltage given in shock
experiments. Finally, there is some intriguing evidence that students who think
their parents tried to teach them that the world was a dangerous place have higher
RWA scores (Altemeyer, 1981, pp. 201–202; 1988, pp. 108, 146, 159; 1996,
pp. 94–95, 140).
Despite these solid findings—and there are others—Altemeyer’s work still
suffers from some fundamental interpretive weaknesses; yes, Highs give longer
sentences to suspects in hypothetical vignettes—but what exactly are they “High”
in, and why do they give these longer sentences? The data do not give us all the
answers, and many of the most important claims Altemeyer makes follow from his
theoretical assumptions. Let us examine their results.
First of all, Altemeyer begins with a continuous scale; like AFLS, he arbitrarily
considers those on one end to be right-wing authoritarians as opposed to those on
the other end or in the middle, a nominalist definition of types. Of course, the actual
data come in the form of a continuum, and Altemeyer (1981, p. 152; 1988, p. 4;
1996, p. 9) admits that Highs are notabsolute in,say,their “submission” to authorities.
But instead of stressing the continuum linking Lows to Highs, Altemeyer tries to
The Authoritarian Personality
13
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

produce a continuum linking Highs to Nazis and Fascists. He comments that Highs
“would be quite susceptible to the flattering proposition that they are members of
a master race. Once you believe that, you cock the pistol for ‘final solutions’ to the
‘problem of the inferiors’ ” (1988, p. 185). Similarly, the high RWA scores among
some Canadian and American legislators lead him to argue that “Some (success-
ful!) politicians in both these democracies appear strongly committed to an authori-
tarian ideology akin to fascism” (1988, p. 257). Finally, he even goes so far as to
argue that “it would outrage many conservatives who condemned the Oklahoma
City bombing to be told they are more different in degree than in kind from the
neo-Nazis out to overthrow the American government. But the evidence in this
book will show the similarities” (1996, p. 5).
If Altemeyer’s RWA scale asked persons whether they supported policies or
ideologies associated with Fascism or Nazism, this would be one thing. But only
a few of the 34 items in the 1996 scale seem related to anything remotely like
fascism (e.g., “What our country really needs is a strong, determined leader who
will crush evil, and take us back to our true path”); others have to do with embracing
free thinkers and radicals, with gender ideology and sexual morality, with respect
for authorities,and with valuing diversityas opposed to fixednessof truth. Sowhere
does Altemeyer get these dramatic ideas regarding the prevalence of Fascist and
Nazi ideology? It is because his most fundamental model is, despite his data and
despite his better common sense, not a continuous one (more to less authoritarian),
but a discrete typology: Some people just are authoritarians. Thus, he makes
blanket statements such as “High RWAs . . . are indifferent to human rights issues,”
or that Highs have a latent “attitude, a state of mind, a willingness to see democratic
institutions destroyed, which in some people may even be a desire.” Although he
rejects AFLS’ psychodynamic theory, he still thinks that Highs have a qualitatively
different personality structure (“We are digging deeper into the authoritarian’s
personality”) (Altemeyer, 1981, p. 251; 1988, p. 6; 1996, pp. 8, 22; cf. 1988, pp.
127, 165 for other examples).
Accordingly, differences in degree are often turned into differences in kind.
For example, when students are told about the results of Milgram’s experiments
on authority, and are asked who would be to blame for the shocks, only 62% of the
Highs blame the authority figure, as opposed to 71% of the Lows (Altemeyer, 1996,
p. 22). Yet it seems noteworthy that the majority of “authoritarians” blame the
authority figure, and that not all Lows (anti-authoritarians) blame him. It is hard to
see how such differences can support the stark interpretations Altemeyer often
makes. Of course, it is always easier to discuss social scientific results in terms of
types than it is to constantly qualify one’s remarks with “tendency,” “proportion,”
and “probability.” Yet in this case, the presence or absence of such qualification
seems of central theoretical importance.
This is because Altemeyer is attempting to use his differences in degree to
support a typological model. He even, like AFLS, illustrates his theory via a
contrast between an archetypal Low and an archetypal High, cutely named Lou
14
Martin
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

and Hugh.8 But these are wholly imaginary constructs—unlike TAP’s Mack, Hugh
is not really there to present evidence that confounds Altemeyer’s (1996, p. 81)
scenarios. In sum, to move from differences in degree (even if statistically signifi-
cant) to differences in kind, Altemeyer seems to rely on the sort of blanket
assertions that undermined AFLS’ program, although any resulting distortions will
be less obvious.
Like AFLS, Altemeyer proceeds in this way because he believes that his test
has “caught” real right-wing authoritarians. Is this necessarily the case? First, by
intentionally writing items that tap more than one of the key factors (submission,
aggression, conventionalism), Altemeyer (1996, p. 320) makes it impossible to test
whether or not they do congeal as a “type” or whether they are more independent
of one another. Altemeyer (1981, p. 188; 1996, p. 15) seems to think that the
psychometric properties of the scale disprove such a scenario, because he argues
that these statistics demonstrate that the scale is measuring “one thing.” But if, say,
the presence of all three traits was needed to answer any item positively, there
would be high intercorrelation between items even though there is no trait at all,
simply a bundle of three traits.9
More important, inspection of the items suggests that whatever the covariation
matrix, it is far from clear as to what traits the items tap. For example, Altemeyer
considers “conventionalism” a key factor, and part of his discussion of this trait
focuses on sex norms (which occupy a fair portion of the scale). He considers a
stance against premarital sex “conventional” (although, of course, all indications
are the opposite, and this is today an unconventional stance for college students),
as opposed to the  more  obvious “morally  conservative.” Other indicators of
“conventionalism” have to do with atheists, nudist camps, the Bible, and rules
regarding modesty (Altemeyer, 1988, p. 64; 1996, p. 11). It is not clear why
Altemeyer is convinced that the attitudes he evokes are “conventional” as opposed to
8 Interestingly, the gendering here seems to follow AFLS’ assumptions. As Young-Bruehl (1996,
pp. 112–113) pointed out, AFLS clearly saw the authoritarian as a “he,” even though most of their
research population was female. Although their exemplary Low case, Larry, was a male, the only
example provided by AFLS of a “genuine liberal” was a 21-year-old “girl” who, while “politically
naïve like the majority of our college women,” “is a handsome brunette with dark flashing eyes, who
exudes temperament and vitality. She has none of the pretty-pretty femininity so frequently seen in
high subjects, and would probably scorn the little feminine wiles and schemes practiced by such
women. On the contrary, she is extremely frank and outspoken in manner, and in build she is athletic.
One senses in her a very passionate nature and so strong a desire to give intensely of herself in all her
relations, that she must experience difficulty in restraining herself within the bounds of convention-
ality” (pp. 782–783). She actually strikes me as quite similar to Altemeyer’s Lou (with “her
explorations, her experiments [that] have proved largely benign and fulfilling,” according to Alte-
meyer) in her winning personality, although AFLS’ “genuine liberal’s” actual words demonstrate that
she was a superficial, materialistic racist who judged people by their skin color.
9 Further, no factor analysis can be counted on to separate these traits, because they are deliberately
blended in each and every item.
The Authoritarian Personality
15
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

part of Ray’s (1988b) “old-fashioned” morality; it is also unclear why convention-
alism is really a part of authoritarianism in the first place.
Further, Altemeyer’s labeling of one trait as “aggression” confuses his theo-
retical claim as to the causes of certain responses and the content of those responses
themselves. It is one thing to argue that rejecting the idea that freedom of speech
extends to revolutionaries is motivated by the desire to aggress against those made
vulnerable by authorities; it is another thing to define it as such. Similarly, he speaks
of investigating the reasons for the “authoritarian’s aggression toward homosexu-
als,” although all he really has is general anti-homosexual attitudes (1988, p. 175)
(only three of the 12 items involve anything like aggression or punitiveness).
This tendency to mix nominalist procedures and realist interpretations culmi-
nates in a process whereby Altemeyer puts words in the mouths of his respondents,
and then uses these words to interpret the “psychology” of the respondents. Thus,
in some experiments, Altemeyer (1981, pp. 233–234) asks students to sentence
various offenders, and then asks them “How bad (repulsive, disgusting) do you
consider the criminal in this case to be?” He finds that RWA score correlates with
this measure of how “bad” the criminal was (r = .48), which is a solid finding. But
he goes on to argue, “What is striking here is the tendency to see ‘common
lawbreakers’ almost as a lower form of life (‘repulsive, disgusting’),” as if the
quoted words were those of Highs. But the words were his, and he left no option
for those who thought the criminals were bad but understood badness in a different
way. Similarly, Altemeyer wonders “What is behind this absorption with, and of,
the conventional?” (among authoritarians, that is); but of course, it is Altemeyer
who is so absorbed with the conventional that he has made it an intrinsic part of
his concept of right-wing authoritarianism: Highs have simply indicated a greater
disapproval of nudist camps and premarital sex.
We have seen that Altemeyer, despite his careful construction of a decently
performing scale, has tied the resulting categories to a theoretically loaded typo-
logy. Moreover, like AFLS, his typology is asymmetric—his theory tells him a lot
about the Highs and little about the Lows, as Altemeyer (1988, pp. 262–263)
admirably admits: “I had no preconception about  what the other end of the
dimension would be, and I have simply characterized low scorers as ‘unauthori-
tarians’ or ‘Lows.’ ” As a result, most of his experiments are ones that do well at
“pushing the buttons” of those who fall into the High end of the scale. Because he
has a less well-developed understanding of the Lows (seeing them simply as
“fair-minded, evenhanded, tolerant, nonaggressive persons” and “good democratic
citizens”), even his noteworthy attempts to compare Low and High responses fall
short. As a result, many of his analyses are asymmetric and biased, despite his
efforts to the contrary. I first give some stark examples of Altemeyer’s assumptions
determining his interpretations, and then subtler examples.
16
Martin
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Imputations of Inconsistency
Altemeyer’s confusion between his mental prototype and his respondents
leads him to impute wild inconsistency to the Highs, since he finds that Highs are
more likely than Lows to say that they would help the government eliminate
right-wing authoritarians—that is, assumes Altemeyer, themselves. But for his
subjects, Altemeyer (1996, p. 30) defined right-wing authoritarians as “people who
are so submissive to authority, so authoritarian aggressive, and so conventional that
they may pose a threat to democratic rule.” If he had more reasonably defined
right-wing authoritarians as “those psychology undergraduates in the highest 25th
percentile of the score resulting from those tests you always fill out,” it strikes me
as extremely unlikely that Highs would help in their elimination. Altemeyer’s
assumption that Highs may pose a threat to democratic rule—an assumption
undemonstrated by his research—gets turned into a definition for the Highs.
And just like AFLS, Altemeyer (1996, p. 142) uses these definitions of his to
impute inconsistency to Highs, although there is no reason to believe that they share
these (non-obvious) definitions: “Authoritarian minds challenge our theories of
cognitive consistency. For [people with high RWA scores], with all their inconsis-
tencies, double standards, and blind spots make a mockery of the notion that people
will feel ‘dissonance’ or ‘imbalance’ if their ideas do not fit together properly.”
But such claims require a benchmark as to what constitutes consistency, and this
benchmark is supplied by Altemeyer (1996, pp. 115, 282), who simply declares
that freedom and equality should not be separated, and that a double standard in
gender ideology is wrong. Those who disagree with either of these (which would
seem to include Tocqueville in the first instance and cultural feminists in the
second) must have some “special kind of mind.”
Comparisons
Were these the only problems, Altemeyer’s rhetorical excesses could be
removed from the work without too much alteration to the basic structure. Yet the
problems go deeper, in that they affect many of his strong findings. That is because
Altemeyer (unlike AFLS) has tried to come up with experiments that will fairly
compare Lows to Highs in a number of respects. Yet the asymmetric nature of his
typological construction leads to an asymmetry in the accumulation of findings,
and hence a biased conclusion. Because the basic research design is set up to
“catch” Highs, Altemeyer is not inspired to create reasonable counterexamples that
would “catch” Lows. As a result, the psychodynamics that Altemeyer does dem-
onstrate to exist among Highs are largely assumed not to be present among Lows.
For example, Altemeyer (1996, pp. 116–117) begins with a solid finding, that
there is an asymmetry in Highs’ feelings as to the legitimacy of entanglement of
state with religion—almosttwice as many see itas legitimate when Canadians teach
Christianity as when an Arab nation teaches Islam. Lows, as might be expected,
The Authoritarian Personality
17
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

have no asymmetry here, because they have no substantive interest in evangelism.
But it stretches credulity to imagine that there are no issues on which the Lows
could be equally tormented. For example, cultural liberals may have a similar
struggle over whether it is acceptable to criticize—and perhaps sanction—nations
with different cultural traditions for their violation of Western norms (for example,
pertaining to the treatment of women), and if not, why it was acceptable for
Northern whites or Canadians or Africans to criticize Southern whites’ racist
“culture.”
In fact, Altemeyer (1996, p. 104) himself provides evidence that the
“irrationality” of Highs is not a general psychological trait, but only comes into
play when their buttons are pushed. In his test as to the ability of respondents
to critically evaluate evidence, he finds vanishingly small relations between
RWA score and gullibility for items not involving Christianity (e.g., ESP,
ancient astronauts, reincarnation, ghosts), but “when it came to ‘evidence’
connected to Highs’ religious beliefs, their critical thinking took a hike. They
might have been as skeptical as others about ghosts, the Bermuda Triangle and
ESP, but to their minds common legends about a big flood proved the story of
Noah.” If Lows cared as much about the Bermuda Triangle as Highs do about
the Bible, this might uncover a similar susceptibility among Lows, but this
equivalence is doubtful. More promising items, such as “the fact that separately
raised identical twins frequently have very different IQ scores PROVES that
intelligence is not hereditary,” where the temptation to make an illogical jump
would be greater, were not asked.
In sum, the asymmetric nature of the basic enterprise leads to the sorts of
illogical imputations of illogicality that marred AFLS’ work, despite Altemeyer’s
best intentions and his reasonable research designs. Further, Altemeyer (1988,
pp. 111–113) has explicitly raised this consideration, namely that perhaps Highs
aren’t so, say, aggressive to those they don’t like, “but only appear so because
investigators such as I keep trooping Highs’ favorite targets before samples tested
in paper-and-pencil shooting galleries. Perhaps Lows would be just as hostile if we
paraded a pantheon of their own devils before them.” At this point, he provides an
exemplary attempt to produce a truly symmetric case, in which both Highs and
Lows judge their “own” side and the “other” side in the same vignette (gay rights
protestor at anti-perversion rally, or vice versa). In this case, he still finds the
tendency to favor the friendly side greater among Highs than Lows, a result similar
to that which I cited above as one of Altemeyer’sstrong findings, namely that Highs
are more influenced in their evaluations by homophily than Lows, who are—as far
as we can tell—fairer. But similarly successful reversals were not used to confirm
the other key findings.
As Altemeyer himself wrote, “To ‘catch’ Lows being more hypocritical than
Highs, you have to turn the tables and put them in conflict over something they
believe in. I have been searching for a situation that would do this” (1996, p. 120).
18
Martin
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

That this search was unsuccessful, however, may be due more to the strength of
Altemeyer’s convictions than to the immunity of Lows to such human foibles.10
Were he able to question his assumptions, some of his most theoretically
important findings would disappear, especially those having to do with self-knowl-
edge. For example, Altemeyer (1988, pp. 186–187) asked subjects, suppose under
a truth drug you said, “I know I have a tendency to hurt people. I am often looking
for permission, or good reasons, or excuses, to attack someone, with words or
actions. And when I do it, it feels good.” Who would accept that this information
is true, and who would disown the admission? Altemeyer found no correlation
between RWA score and response, and concluded “either Highs do not believe they
are particularly aggressive, or else they know but will not admit it.” That is, because
he has operationalized “aggressiveness” in terms of prison sentences and shock
values—and now ignores information about aggressive fantasies, which points in
another direction (1988, pp. 139–144)—he assumes that Highs really are “particu-
larly” aggressive, and then reinterprets the data as if he had asked persons whether
they were “particularly” aggressive, or “above the mean.” The actual question,
however, was framed so that all respondents should assume that the truth is that
they are aggressive, whatever their usual behavior (and, because all persons have
some aggression, such a drug-induced revelation could not  be  dismissed  by
anyone). But to Altemeyer, the question was a different one, formally parallel to
the old courtroom gag, “Have you stopped beating your wife yet?,” and it is clear
that it was designed only to “catch” Highs.
For another, even starker, example, Altemeyer (1988) asked, “How preju-
diced, how bigoted do you think you are against the minority groups mentioned
above, compared with the other students serving in this experiment?” (p. 187).
Altemeyer thus gave the Highs no option to “tell it their way”—they are damned
if they do and damned if they don’t. But he never thought to ask Lows the kind of
question a maliciously disposed High researcher might, such as “How neurotically
insecure, how knee-jerk do you think your basic attitudes toward minority groups
are?” As Altemeyer himself wrote, “The lesson was clear: if you describe right-
wing authoritarianism to a group of people, most of the Highs in the group will
think you are talking about somebody else” (1988, p. 316). But this should be taken
as a critique of the typologizers, not the typologized.
In sum, like AFLS, Altemeyer has set up the board in such a way that the game
is a fait accompli. Because his definitions are the ones that count, those who
disagree must have something wrong with them. Those who oppose Canada’s 1981
10Indeed, even when Altemeyer (1996, p. 99) turns self-critical, the resulting criticisms are not those
that could be used to gain insight into this asymmetric approach. Although he asks himself, quite
seriously, “how come I do not realize my own compartmentalized thinking?”, the only example that
comes to mind is his sexist thinking—that is, thinking that is associated with high RWA scores—and
not any of the assumptions that guide his interpretive scheme, and which might be the basis for turning
the tables on Lows.
The Authoritarian Personality
19
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Charter of Rights and Freedoms cannot be democratic, because to oppose increased
civil liberties is always anti-democratic (Altemeyer, 1988, p. 271). But, of course,
a High researcher could probably define democracy in a populist sense to demon-
strate that (due to his strong commitment to the civil liberties of dissenters who
flaunt their rejection of conventional moral standards) it was Altemeyer who had a
“shallow commitment to democracy.” Surely we can learn nothing on the basis of
such definitions. Yet these flow from the asymmetric typology with which Alte-
meyer began.
What Do We Know?
In sum, Altemeyer has found out a great deal about how people with high RWA
scores act, but he has not made a reasonable comparison to people with low RWA
scores. This should not be taken to imply that a good comparison, by definition, is
one that would find no differences between Highs and Lows. People are different
in many ways—some of them really are gentler than others, some more honest,
etc.—and it would be unscientific to demand that no such differences appear on
average in this case. But before we can make a real comparison, we need to find
whatever scale it is that “Lows” are high on; only then would we know what buttons
to push, and whether there were a few such buttons for all Lows or whether they
are a more diverse category.
Further, although we know that Highs and Lows differ, it is not clear what
being High as opposed to Low is all about. Altemeyer argues that he is measuring
right-wing  authoritarianism. But  the  most obvious alternatives are  that he is
measuring either political conservatism or social/moral conservatism, or both. And
here Altemeyer must walk a tightrope, demonstrating that his RWA measure is
closely correlated with both of these, but not reducible to either. Altemeyer has,
consequently, gone back and forth as to the overlap between right-wing authori-
tarianism and conservatism, at times arguing that they are totally different and at
other times basically the same (see Altemeyer, 1981, pp. 202f; 1988, p. 8; 1996, p.
48). But his evidence is less ambiguous. In particular, upon administering his scale
to professional politicians, he finds large differences between persons in different
parties, and extremely high consistencies (interitem correlations) within the scale.
This strongly suggests that rather than drawing deep-seated personality responses
from legislators, these items are evoking the party line. Indeed, as Altemeyer
himself pointed out regarding the Manitoba legislators from the (left) NDP, “these
lawmakers who strongly agreed that citizens should not trust their governments,
should not submit blindly, should be ready to protest against injustice, and so on
were the government in Manitoba and had been for 10 of the past 14 years.”
Consequently, Altemeyer (1988, pp. 243–245, 256) here stressed that the dimen-
sion he was tapping “appears to be a more precise, and certainly more operational,
definition of what the basic ‘left/right’ dimension really is.” But this is to imply
20
Martin
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

that he is really examining a bipolar political continuum and not “the psychology
of right-wing authoritarians.”
Finally, the asymmetry of Altemeyer’s orientation may not simply have
affected his interpretations, it may have also affected the responses, if students were
aware of what constituted the “locally” desirable answers. In particular, this might
account for some (but not necessarily all) of the findings Altemeyer (1996, p. 141)
sees as indicating selective High inattention to “bad news” about themselves.
Altemeyer asked half his students to imagine an experiment showing that they were
more prejudiced than others in the class, while the other half were asked to imagine
that they learned they were less prejudiced. He then asked whether the students
would want to see the results. Among Lows, 76% wanted to see the results when
they were more prejudiced (i.e., bad news) and 71% wanted to hear the good news
that they were less prejudiced. In contrast, among Highs, while 74% wanted the
good news, only 56% wanted the bad news. But given that it is Altemeyer who
decides what constitutes “prejudice,” and that the Highs may have learned that his
definitions [according to which conservatives are not conservatives because they
do not wish to “conserve” civil liberties (Altemeyer, 1988, p. 273)] do not have
much to do with theirs, I find it surprising that a majority were at all interested in
more scientific findings regarding their shortcomings.
Moreover, it is worth considering that we know rather little about how the
climate of moral judgment may affect tasks intended to measure cognitive proc-
essing. Brown (1953) presented strong evidence suggesting that at least some of
the supposed cognitive correlates of authoritarianism were contextual [in brief,
when the pressure was off, they relaxed (cf. Christie, 1993)]; recent experimental
work by Lovaglia, Lucas, Houser, Thye, and Markovsky (1998) confirms that
responses can be significantly altered by the tension aroused when one fears that
test results may be used against one.
In sum, Altemeyer’s work, although methodologically rigorous in substance,
still suffers from the same interpretive flaws that marked TAP. Despite Altemeyer’s
(1996, p. 303) conviction that any such bias will be uncovered by later researchers,
it seems reasonable that if the same basic flaws are present 50 years after TAP, they
will not disappear of their own accord. I will be the first to admit that this is a
selective presentation of Altemeyer’s work (although I believe it is a fair one), work
that I consider to be a valuable contribution to political psychology. Despite my
emphasis on where he goes from differences in degree to differences in kind,
Altemeyer (e.g., 1996, p. 112) himself frequently gives reminders to the readers
that Highs and Lows are only “somewhat different” and not “completely different.”
It is because Altemeyer displays such methodological care and common sense that
his work can demonstrate the fundamental nature of the interpretive asymmetries
that arise from the use of a morally loaded typology, and the strength of the
temptations that come with these asymmetries.
Further, even if we were to see the balanced replication of all these tests
constructed by a maliciously disposed High researcher, I believe that many (though
The Authoritarian Personality
21
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

not all) of his findings would prove robust. But the force of Altemeyer’s work
comes not from the findings themselves, which may be interpreted in a number of
ways, but in the interpretive model he hangs on them. And it is this model, based
on an asymmetric typology, that must be treated as suspect.
Conclusions
Are two beliefs inconsistent? Does a political position espoused by a set of
respondents follow from a value they hold, or do they claim to hold some value
merely to legitimate their position? These and many other questions are continually
at the heart of political psychology, and any answer, whether or not it can be seen
as related to explicit political values or to psychological theories held by the analyst,
will involve an assessment of the “integrity” of the subjects. But as Kurzman (1991)
has shown, when analysts like and identify with respondents, they accept their
self-explanations, and when they do not, they explain them away.
In many cases, we are positively called to make such judgments. One obvious
example is the racial attitudes of white Americans. Experimental evidence leaves
us no doubt that strong social desirability effects lead a significant portion of whites
to understate their dislike of blacks in general and affirmative action in particular
(Sniderman & Carmines, 1997). Hence, any direct attempt to measure racism will
not “catch” all the racists; accordingly, there have been various proposals for tests
of “new” or “symbolic” racism (e.g., Kinder & Sears, 1981; McConahay & Hough,
1976). Experimental evidence suggests that these measures can indeed pick up
durable orientations to blacks that an explicit measure of “old-fashioned” racism
would miss (see McConahay, 1986, for a review). And, while space forbids a real
examination, it strikes me that the internal validity is rather good for the interpre-
tation of some such scales (but not all) as tapping generalized antipathy toward
blacks, at least in the public sphere (for a recent example, see Sears, van Laar,
Carrillo, & Kosterman, 1997). But if—as we are often tempted—we try to use these
to “catch” racists, we end up dismissing what the respondents themselves say about
their beliefs, ignoring them when they claim to be individualists, laissez-faire
liberals, or what have you.
It is worth noting that early uses of the concept of symbolic racism were quite
explicit in distinguishing it from generic hostility to blacks; indeed, McConahay
and Hough (1976) defined it as a reaction to the extension of the civil rights
movement, an extension that seemed illegitimate to those holding the “American
civil Protestant” ethic—more or less the same argument that Sniderman and
Carmines (1997) have made. Indeed, there is broad agreement that opposition to
many legislative efforts to help blacks is motivated by both political values and
generalized antipathy—the question revolves on how we interpret this, whether
political values and antipathy to blacks are necessarily interconnected, and whether
we should take seriously other considerations that respondents may raise having to
do with their perception of self-interest (Bobo, 1983; 1988, p. 105). Theories of
22
Martin
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

symbolic racism, while differing in their particulars, answer that there is a funda-
mental fusion of this racist antipathy and traditional values.
As a result, the theory has come in for some rather strong criticism. Although
it has occasionally led to the attribution of such antipathy to blacks on the basis of
little more than opposition to certain policies, the theory has not (as opponents
sometimes suggest) simply claimed that symbolic racists are bigots disguising their
racism under a cloak of values (see Sears, 1988, pp. 66, 70), but has instead
postulated a coherent, and in principle testable, fusion between the two.11 Why,
then, is there a problem?
The problem arises, as might now come as no surprise, from the asymmetric
definition of a morally suspect type, a combination of nominalist procedures and
realist interpretations, and the agonistic attempt to trap “Highs.” Like Altemeyer
and AFLS, Kinder and Sears (1981) began by assuming that deviation from their
own prescriptions must be explained, and explained away as a psychological
property, not a serious argument [“The signs of white resistance to change in the
racial status quo are unmistakable, but how might such resistance be understood
in psychological terms?” (p. 414, emphasis added)].
Like Altemeyer, Kinder and Sears claimed the existence of such a psychologi-
cal property, but this leads to the difficulty of demonstrating that symbolic racism
is neither the same thing as old-fashioned racism nor unrelated to it. Like Alte-
meyer, they tended to combine rigorous studies with sweeping theoretical claims
that were too deeply burrowed into their definitions to be testable. Like Altemeyer,
they established the existence of their theoretically central trait largely by defining
the phenomenon in advance, by writing “questions that deliberately mix racist
sentiments and traditional American values, particularly individualism” (Kinder,
1986, p. 156; cf. Sniderman & Tetlock, 1986b, p. 181). Even though this makes
sense given a deductive theory-testing framework, it is a practice that makes it a
priori impossible to find some people whose motivations are based solelyon values,
and others whose opinions are based solely on racism (cf. Sniderman & Tetlock,
1986a, p. 132). Indeed, the presence of either type in the population will tend to be
taken as evidence in favor of the claim that there is currently an inseparable
combination of the two.
Finally, in a few cases, analysts have put the cart before the horse and assumed
that opposition to certain programs itself measures symbolic racism. Although it is
reasonable to believe that anti-black sentiment is sufficient to lead to opposition
to, say, enforced busing, it is less reasonable to propose [as Sears (1988, p. 57)
seems to] that it is necessary. In so doing, the researcher substitutes definition for
11Kinder and Sears clearly intended to be laying out a supportable theory of the development of
specifically symbolic (andnot masked,subtle,orindirect)racism,inwhichthe response ofa non-black
to some policy designed to aid blacks would be mediated by an abstract symbol of blacks in the public
sphere, and the dispositions held to that symbol. However, because no work specifically focused on
the creation of this symbol or demonstrated its existence, attention shifted from the “symbolic” half
to the “racism” half (cf. Kinder, 1986, p. 155).
The Authoritarian Personality
23
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

analyses by taking the definition of symbolic racism as, for example, opposition to
affirmative action and enforced desegregation in education, to dismiss the justifi-
cation of these positions by their adherents as “rationalizations of the negative
feeling about blacks lying behind such policy preferences.” Such dismissal is
fundamentally based in the researcher privileging his own judgment of the situ-
ation, according to which the respondents are simply exhibiting “indifference . . .
to many of the facts” (Sears, 1988, p. 74).12 But as we have seen, ignoring what
respondents say is a dangerous game, precisely because it is one the researcher
always wins.
Fifty years later, the unsound nature of TAP is so blatant that this essay almost
seems unsporting, yet it originally was taken quite seriously. Although methodo-
logical critiques were made from the earliest days, I have seen no categorical
dismissals. Presumably, there was sufficient broad agreement that there were “bad
guys” out there who deserved no quarter, and the dismissal that seems minimally
appropriate by today’s standards appeared excessive then. Might we, then, also be
in the middle of constructing research that, 50 years hence, will only shame us?
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Charles Kurzman, four anonymous reviewers, and the editors for
their comments and critique that have led to the improvement of this paper. It
also seems fitting to acknowledge here the influence of my teacher Herbert
Hyman, who insisted that true tolerance is a matter of common sense and human
decency, not philosophy. Correspondence concerning this article should be sent
to John Levi Martin, Department of Sociology, Rutgers—The State University of
New Jersey, 54 Joyce Kilmer Avenue, Piscataway, NJ 08854-8045. E-mail:
jlmartin@rci.rutgers.edu
REFERENCES
Adorno, T. W., Frenkel-Brunswik, E., Levinson, D. J., & Sanford, R. N. (1950). The authoritarian
personality. New York: Harper and Row.
Altemeyer, B. (1981). Right-wing authoritarianism. Winnipeg: University of Manitoba Press.
Altemeyer, B. (1988). Enemies of freedom: Understanding right-wing authoritarianism. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.
Altemeyer, B. (1996). The authoritarian specter. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Baars, J., & Scheepers, P. (1993). Theoretical and methodological foundations of the authoritarian
personality. Journal of the History of the Behavioral Sciences, 29, 345–353.
12Furthermore, as critics pointed out, the same variables that could be used to tap symbolic racism were
at other times seen as effects of symbolic racism. This suggests that the term “symbolic racism” could
be dropped from the analysis without loss of explanatory power, and that it is simply tapping an
extremely proximate ideology as opposed to a deep aspect of personality.
24
Martin
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Billig, M. (1977). The new social psychology and fascism. European Journal of Social Psychology, 7,
393–432.
Bobo, L. (1983). Whites’ opposition to busing: Symbolic racism or realistic group conflict? Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 1196–1210.
Bobo, L. (1988). Group conflict, prejudice, and the paradox of contemporary racial attitudes. In P. A.
Katz & D. A. Taylor (Eds.), Eliminating racism: Profiles in controversy (pp. 85–114). New York:
Plenum.
Brown, R. W. (1953). A determinant of the relationship between rigidity and authoritarianism. Journal
of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 48, 469–476.
Chancer, L. S. (1992). Sadomasochism in everyday life. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Christie, R. (1954). Authoritarianism re-examined. In R. Christie & M. Jahoda (Eds.), Studies in the
scope and method of “The authoritarian personality” (pp. 123–196). Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Christie, R. (1993). Some experimental approaches to authoritarianism: I. A retrospective perspective
on the Einstellung (rigidity?) paradigm. In W. Stone, G. Lederer, & R. Christie (Eds.), Strength
and weakness (pp. 70–98). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Dorn, D. S., & Long, G. L. (1972, May). Sociology and the radical right: A critical analysis. American
Sociologist, 8–9.
Duckitt, J. (1983a). Authoritarianism and adjustment in an authoritarian culture. Journal of Social
Psychology, 121, 211–212.
Duckitt, J. (1983b). Culture, class, personality, and authoritarianism among white South Africans.
Journal of Social Psychology, 121, 191–199.
Durrheim, K. (1997). Theoretical conundrum: The politics and science of theorizing authoritarian
cognition. Political Psychology, 18, 625–647.
Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life. New York: Anchor.
Heaven, P. C. (1983). Individual vs. intergroup explanations of prejudice among Afrikaners. Journal
of Social Psychology, 121, 201–210.
Heaven, P. C. (1984). Afrikaner patriotism today: The role of attitudes and personality. Canadian
Review of Studies in Nationalism, 11, 133–139.
Hopf, C. (1987). Zur Aktualität der Untersuchungen zur “autoritären Persönlichkeit.” Zeitschrift für
Sozialisationsforschung und Erziehungssoziologie, 7, 162–177.
Hyman, H. H., & Sheatsley, P. B. (1954). “The authoritarian personality”—A methodological critique.
In R. Christie & M. Jahoda (Eds.), Studies in the scope and method of “The authoritarian
personality” (pp. 51–123). Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Kinder, D. R. (1986). The continuing American dilemma: White resistance to racial change 40 years
after Myrdal. Journal of Social Issues, 42, 151–171.
Kinder, D. R., & Sears, D. O. (1981). Symbolic racism vs. threats to “the good life.” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 40, 414–431.
Kurzman, C. (1991). Convincing sociologists: Values and interests in the sociology of knowledge. In
M. Burawoy (Ed.), Ethnography unbound: Power and resistance in the modern metropolis
(pp. 250–268). Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Lewis, C. A., & Maltby, J. (1995). Authoritarianism and projection. Psychological Reports, 77, 362.
Lichter, S. R., & Rothman, S. (1982). The radical personality: Social psychological correlates of new
left ideology. Political Behavior, 4, 207–235.
Lovaglia, M. J., Lucas, J. W., Houser, J. A., Thye, S. R., & Markovsky, B. (1998). Status processes and
mental ability test scores. American Journal of Sociology, 103, 195–228.
McConahay, J. B. (1986). Modern racism, ambivalence, and the modern racism scale. In J. F. Dovidio
&S.L.Gaertner(Eds.),Prejudice,discrimination, andracism (pp. 91–125). New York: Academic
Press.
McConahay, J. B., & Hough, J. C., Jr. (1976). Symbolic racism. Journal of Social Issues, 32, 23–45.
The Authoritarian Personality
25
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

McFarland, S. G., Ageyev, V. S., & Abalakina-Paap, M. A. (1992). Authoritarianism in the former
Soviet Union. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 1004–1010.
Murray, H. A. (1938). Explorations in personality. New York: Wiley.
Neel, R. G., Tzeng, O. C., & Baysal, C. (1983). Comparative studies of authoritarian-personality
characteristics across culture, language, and methods. International Journal of Intercultural
Relations, 7, 393–400.
Ray, J. J. (1984). Alternatives to the F scale in the measurement of authoritarianism: A catalog. Journal
of Social Psychology, 122, 105–119.
Ray, J. J. (1985). The punitive personality. Journal of Social Psychology, 125, 329–333.
Ray, J. J. (1988a). Why the F scale predicts racism: A critical review. Political Psychology, 9, 671–679.
Ray, J. J.(1988b). Sexual liberation,old-fashionedoutlook,andauthoritarianism:A comment onKelley.
Journal of Sex Research, 24, 385–387.
Rosen, E. (1951). Differences between volunteersand non-volunteers for psychological studies. Journal
of Applied Psychology, 35, 185–193.
Rothman, S., & Lichter, S. R. (1978). The case of the student left. Social Research, 35, 535–609.
Samelson, F. (1986). Authoritarianism from Berlin to Berkeley: On social psychology and history.
Journal of Social Issues, 42, 191–208.
Sanford, N. (1986).A personal accountof the study ofauthoritarianism: CommentonSamelson.Journal
of Social Issues, 42, 209–214.
Sears, D. O. (1988). Symbolic racism. In P. A. Katz & D. A. Taylor (Eds.), Eliminating racism: Profiles
in controversy (pp. 53–84). New York: Plenum.
Sears, D. O., van Laar, C., Carrillo, M., & Kosterman, R. (1997). Is it really racism? Public Opinion
Quarterly, 61, 16–53.
Shils, E. A. (1954). Authoritarianism: “Right” and “left.” In R. Christie & M. Jahoda (Eds.), Studies in
the scope and method of “The authoritarian personality” (pp. 24–49). Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Smith, D. N. (1996). The  social construction of enemies: Jews  and the representation  of evil.
Sociological Theory, 14, 203–240.
Smith, M. B. (1997). The authoritarian personality: A re-review 46 years later. Political Psychology,
18, 159–163.
Sniderman, P. M., & Carmines, E. G. (1997). Reaching beyond race. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Sniderman, P. M., & Tetlock, P. E. (1986a). Symbolic racism: Problems of motive attribution in political
analysis. Journal of Social Issues, 42, 129-150.
Sniderman, P. M., & Tetlock, P. E. (1986b). Reflections on American racism. Journal of Social Issues,
42, 173–187.
Stone, W., Lederer, G., & Christie, R. (Eds.) (1993). Strength and weakness. New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Tetlock, P. E. (1994). Political psychology or politicized psychology: Is the road to scientific hell paved
with good moral intentions? Political Psychology, 15, 509–529.
Titus, H. E., & Hollander, E. P. (1957). The California F scale in psychological research: 1950–1955.
Psychological Bulletin, 54, 47–64.
Young-Bruehl, E. (1996). The anatomy of prejudices. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
26
Martin
 14679221, 2001, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/0162-895X.00223 by <Shibboleth>-member@ucl.ac.uk, Wiley Online Library on [14/02/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License