Projection in Folklore: A Plea for Psychoanalytic Semiotics
Author(s): Alan Dundes
Source: MLN, Vol. 91, No. 6, Comparative Literature (Dec., 1976), pp. 1500-1533
Published by: The Johns Hopkins University Press
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2907148
Accessed: 14-02-2025 08:27 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
The Johns Hopkins University Press is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
extend access to MLN
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

I ROJECTION IN FOLKLORE: A PLEA
FOR PSYCHOANALYTIC SEMIOTICS e
ALAN DUNDES i Folklore means something-to the
tale teller, to the song singer, to the riddler, and to the audience or
addressees. A given item of folklore may mean different things to
different tale tellers or to different audiences. It may mean differ-
ent things to different members of the same audience; it may
mean different things to a single tale teller at different times in his
life. This seems obvious enough. But despite the assiduous collec-
tion of scores and scores of folklore texts, there has been precious
little attention paid to what these texts mean.
In the nineteenth century and before, folklore was thought to be
dead survival from ages past rather than a live functioning part of
the present day world of man. Even as late as 1931, Ruth Benedict
writing the entry on folklore for the prestigious Encyclopaedia of the
Social Sciences observed that "Folklore has not survived as a living
trait in modern civilization" and that "Thus in a strict sense folklore
is a dead trait in the modern world."' To be sure, one can find
easily enough bona fide evidence of survivals. Consider, for exam-
ple, the name of the month September which is our ninth month. It
is derived from the Latin word for seven (as October is from eight,
November from nine, and December from ten). Reconstructing
history from etymology, we can see that if September were the
seventh month, then the first month of the year must have been
March rather than January, and in fact the onset of spring makes
much better sense metaphorically as the appropriate time to signal
the birth of a new year. In Europe, the designation of January first
as the beginning of the new year is a relatively recent innovation.
But the point is that folklore can hardly be limited to survivals. The
folklore of social protest and the folklore of computers dem-
onstrate convincingly that folklore is a living trait in the modern
world.
One difficulty impeding the study of meaning of folklore stems
1 Ruth Benedict, "Folklore," Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences, VI (New York,
1931), pp. 288-293.
MLN 91 (1976) 1500-1533
Copyright ? 1976 by The Johns Hopkins University Press
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

M L N 1501
from the fact that a goodly portion of folklore is fantasy, collective
or collectivized fantasy. I do not refer here to any Jungian sense of
a collective unconscious. The evidence available from the Motif-
Index of Folk Literature shows quite plainly that few if any narrative
elements have universal distribution.2 Quite the contrary, most
narrative traditions have strictly circumscribed areas of distribu-
tion. The localization of fantasy is empirically demonstrable. Trolls
are found only in Scandinavia; leprechauns only in Ireland,
menehune only in Polynesia.3 The cultural relativity of fantasy is
also suggested by the fact that it is only Christians who report
seeing visions of the Virgin Mary. Those who argue that a given
example of fantasy is universal rarely cite data from aboriginal
Australia, Africa, or the Indian peoples of South America. It is true
that all peoples have folklore and in that sense folklore could con-
ceivably qualify as a universal. However, the particular folklore
possessed by a particular folk varies from culture to culture even
though historically related peoples share some folklore in common.
When I speak of folklore being collective, I mean that a myth or a
folksong is known by more than a single individual. An item of
folklore is known by several individuals, usually many individuals,
and it is transmitted from person to person, often over the course
of generations. Collective folklore differs from individual dreams.
Dreams appear to be similar to narratives in part because they are
related in words. But a dream may or may not be sufficiently intel-
ligible or interesting to be related by a second party to a third party.
Folktales, in contrast, like all folklore, have passed the test of time,
and are transmitted again and again. Unlike individual dreams,
folktales must appeal to the psyches of many, many individuals if
they are to survive.
The fantastic dimensions of folklore have been consistently dis-
2 Stith Thompson, Motif-Index of Folk Literature, 6 vols. (Bloomington, 1955-1958).
For a discussion of some of the more widespread narrative elements in the world,
see Clyde Kluckhohn, "Recurrent Themes in Myths and Mythmaking," Daedalus, 88
(1959), 266-279, reprinted in Alan Dundes, ed., The Study of Folklore (Englewood
Cliffs, 1965), pp. 158-168. For a balanced account of the Jungian view, see Wilson
M. Hudson, "Jung on Myth and the Mythic," in The Sunny Slopes of Long Ago,
Publications of the Texas Folklore Society XXXIII (Dallas, 1966), pp. 181-197. For a
more partisan treatment, see Marie Louise von Franz, An Introduction to the In-
terpretation of Fairy Tales (New York, 1970).
3 For details of the menehune, see Katharine Luomala, The Menehune oj Polynesia
and Other Mythical Little People of Oceania, Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bulletin 203
(Honolulu, 1951).
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1502 ALAN DUNDES
regarded by folklorists and members of other disciplines studying
folkloristic data. These scholars prefer instead to concentrate upon
collection, classification, storage (in archives), comparison, and
endless searching for the oldest cognate versions of a particular
piece of folklore. The history of folklore scholarship is by and large
a series of attempts to dehumanize folklore. I mean dehumanize
quite literally. Considering "folklore" without reference to "folk" is
commonplace in folkloristics. Whether one assigns motif or tale
type numbers, or attempts to structurally dissect a given folklore
text, one can effectively forget about the fact that folklore is used as
a means of traditional communication between humans.
The influence of semiotics upon folkloristics has not been al-
together salutary. The scholarship of semiotics seems bloated with
pompous terminology and littered with competing unintelligible
abstract formulations, formulations which seem far removed from
any close contact with empirical data. For semiotics, although os-
tensibly concerned with meaning, tends to emphasize the logical
rather than the psychological facets of the data being examined.
Semiotic analyses generally treat the composition or structural pat-
terning of a text to the exclusion of any concern for possible
psychological meanings of that text. Structuralism perceived as one
branch of semiotics should be considered as essentially being a
rigorous means of descriptive ethnography. Structural analyses at-
tempt to tell us what an object is, not what the object is for or what it
means. To be sure, there is nothing wrong with descriptive ethnog-
raphy. On the contrary, one needs to know the nature of the object
one is studying. It is only that pure structuralism has a tendency to
stop after describing in agonizing detail an object's actual or
imagined constituent elements and the patterns of interrelationships
between those elements. In short, however useful semiotics may be
for honing the tools of description and classification in folkloristics,
it has yet to prove itself in the study of the meaning of folklore.
Thus, for example, Propp's important Morphology of the Folktale
gives us an unrivaled view of the nature of Indo-European mdrchen,
but Propp's delineation of thirty-one functions (or what I have
rechristened motifemes following Kenneth Pike) does not explain
why the fairy tale pattern should exist in the first place or what, if
anything, it means.4
4 Vladimir Propp, Morphology of the Folktale (Austin, 1968). For my adaptation of
Propp's function, see "From Etic to Emic Units in the Structural Study of Folktales,"
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

M L N 1503
I believe that one reason why structuralism is sweeping through
folkloristics (which habitually maintains a respectful pace of a dec-
ade or so behind advances in linguistics theory) is that the shift
from diachronic to synchronic methodology posed no serious
threat to the folk-less study of folklore. At first practitioners of the
historical and comparative methods were adamantly opposed to
structuralism which they felt gave short shrift to historical and
comparative dimensions. But in time, it was realized that the same
nonpsychological bias could prevail. Instead of plotting the dis-
tribution of motifs or quaint customs on maps-as is done in Euro-
pean atlas work in folkloristics, one could stick the very same "but-
terflies" on another kind of board and proceed to dissect them.
Butterfly collection of antiquarian days had finally advanced to the
point of demonstrating that a butterfly was a mediating model
consisting primarily of two wings in opposition-if I may somewhat
facetiously and unfairly describe the binary penchant of Levi-
Straussians.
Interestingly enough, structuralism has opened up anew the
question of the existence of the unconscious, but it has done so in a
curiously unproductive way from my point of view. It is true that
matters of grammar and syntax are not conscious-in the sense
that individuals perfectly well able to speak a language cannot ar-
ticulate the underlying grammatical or syntactical principles gov-
erning their speech acts. But this is hardly the unconscious of the
Freudian variety in which materials, often of a taboo nature, are
repressed and disguised.
It is my contention that much of the meaning of folkloristic fan-
tasy is unconscious. Indeed, it would have to be unconscious-in
the Freudian sense-for folklore to function as it does. Among its
functions, folklore provides a socially sanctioned outlet for the ex-
pression of what cannot be articulated in the more usual, direct
way. It is precisely in jokes, folktales, folksongs, proverbs, chil-
dren's games, gestures, etc. that anxieties can be vented. If a person
knew exactly what he was doing when he told ajoke to his boss or to
his spouse (or if the boss or spouse knew what he was doing), the
Journal of American Folklore, 75 (1962), 95-105, reprinted in Alan Dundes, Analytic
Essays in Folklore (The Hague, 1975), pp. 61-72. For an indication of trends in the
semiotic study of folk narrative, see Claude Bremond, Logique du recit (Paris, 1973)
and William O. Hendricks, Essays on Semiolinguistics and Verbal Art, Approaches to
Semiotics 37 (The Hague, 1973). For a useful survey of structuralism, see Robert
Scholes, Structuralism in Literature: An Introduction (New Haven, 1974).
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1504 ALAN DUNDES
joke would probably cease to be an escape mechanism. Man needs
such mechanisms which is why there will always be folklore, and
also incidentally why there is always new folklore being created to
take care of new anxieties-I refer, for example, to the folklore of
bureaucracy transmitted so effectively by the office-copier
machine.5
The unconscious nature of so much of folklore makes the study of
meaning difficult though not impossible. It is difficult because it is
not easy to elicit native testimony about such meanings. Uncon-
scious symbolism is just as hard for informants to articulate as is the
grammar of the languages they speak. Moreover, just as there are
competing modes of grammatical analysis, so also are there com-
peting schools of symbolism. So if the informant cannot enlighten
the folklorist with respect to meaning-either by telling him about
it initially or by corroborating an educated guess of the folklorist,
how can the meaning of folklore be investigated?
Fortunately, there is patterning and system in folklore, and it is
this remarkable consistency which can assist the folklorist in-
terested in meaning. Jakobson and Bogatyrev in 1929 pointed out
that the Saussurean distinction between langue and parole could be
applied to folklore.6 Accordingly, an individual folkloristic per-
formance or communication act bore the same kind of relationship
to the general folkloristic code that an individualistic speech act did
to the language as a whole. I believe symbolism works in a similar
fashion, such that the symbol employed in any one given folkloris-
tic (con) text may be related to a general system of symbols. This
does not mean that I think any one symbol is necessarily universal.
In fact, I know of no symbol which is reported from all peoples,just
as I know of no myth which has universal distribution. What I am
saying is that within a culturally relative system of symbols, the use
of a particular symbol may be remarkably consistent. I hasten to
also add that symbols-opposed to signs-may carry multiple
meanings. (I realize that some semioticians consider symbol a sub-
category of sign, but I prefer to treat them separately.)
5 For a representative collection of office-copier folklore, see Alan Dundes and
Carl R. Pagter, Urban Folklore from the Paperwork Empire (Austin, 1975).
6 P. Bogatyrev and R. Jakobson, "Die Folklore als besondere Form des Schaffens,"
in Verzameling van Opstellen Door Oud-Leerlingen en Bevriende Vakgenooten Opgedragen
Aan Mrg. Prof. Jos. Schrijnen (Donum Natalicium Schrijnen) (Nijmegen-Utrecht,
1929), pp. 900-913.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

M L N 1505
I intend to illustrate the above by referring to several specific
examples of folklore; but before I do so, I should like to mention
briefly the crucial device of projection. In psychology, projection
refers to the tendency to attribute to another person or to the
environment what is actually within oneself. What is attributed is
usually some internal impulse or feeling which is painful, unac-
ceptable, or taboo. The ascription of feelings and qualities of one's
own to a source in the external world is accomplished without the
individual's being consciously aware of the fact. The individual
perceives the external object as possessing the taboo tendencies
without recognizing their source in himself.7 I might mention that
Charles S. Peirce was aware of the existence of projection. He
wrote, "I think it is probably true that every element of experience is
in the first instance applied to an external object. A man who gets
up out of the wrong side of the bed, for example, attributes wrong-
ness to almost every object he perceives. This is the way in which he
experiences his bad temper."8 Despite the triviality of the example,
the aptness of the insight remains valid. Of course, Freud said it too
and with specific reference to folklore: "As a matter of fact, I be-
lieve that a large portion of the mythological conception of the
world which reaches far into the most modern religions, is nothing
but psychology projected to the outer world."9
7 My sources for the definition of projection include: Leopold Bellak, "The Con-
cept of Projection: An Experimental Investigation and Study of the Concept,"
Psychiatry, 7 (1944), 354; Gardiner Lindzey, Projective Techniques and Cross-Cultural
Research (New York, 1961), pp. 25-31; and Ludwig Eidelberg, ed., Encyclopedia of
Psychoanalysis (New York, 1968), p. 331.
8 Justus Buchler, ed., Philosophical Writings of Peirce (New York, 1955), p. 88.
9 Sigmund Freud, The Basic Writings of Sigmund Freud (New York, 1938), p. 164.
One distinct advantage of Freud's approach as opposed to Jung's is the possibility of
reconciling it with cultural relativism. It was Kardiner, among others, who dem-
onstrated how specific projective systems might be derived from particular cul-
tural contexts. See Abram Kardiner, The Individual and his Society (New York, 1939)
and The Psychological Frontiers of Society (New York, 1945). Jung's projections in
theory cannot as easily be reconciled with cultural relativism inasmuch as they are
presumed to be genetic, innate, a priori, inherited, ptre-cultural archetypes. Jung is
quite clear on this point. "One encounters projections, one does not make them."
"The primitive mentality does not invent myths, it experiences them. Myths are
original revelations of the pre-conscious psyche, involuntary statements about un-
conscious psychic happenings." "For the archetype, of course, exists a priori." "Ar-
chetypes are . . . autonomous elements of the unconscious psyche which were there
before any invention was thought of." "We must therefore assume that they corre-
spond to certain collective (and not personal) structural elements of the human
psyche in general, and, like the morphological elements of the human body, are
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1506 ALAN DUNDES
I should also point out en passant that the discipline most con-
cerned with projection is psychology and yet psychologists rarely
think of folklore in connection with projection. Lindzey's Projective
Techniques and Cross-Cultural Research published in 1961, for exam-
ple, contains not even a mention of folklore.10 For psychologists,
projective techniques involve the utilization of tests or devices such
as Rorschach or T.A.T. (Thematic Apperception Test). As a
folklorist, I would argue that such devices are a priori artificial
techniques usually imposed upon hapless subjects from outside the
cultures of many of the subjects. How many peoples around the
world are accustomed to interpreting inkblots? It is a question
whether the results of such tests reflect the personalities of the
test-takers or the test-makers! Folklore is quite different. The pro-
jective materials, if folklore is indeed projective, come from within
the culture. It has been created, passed on, and enjoyed for consid-
erable time long before the analyst arrives upon the scene. Folklore
as autobiographical ethnography, as a mirror of culture, is a
natural projective test-as opposed to the artifical schemata de-
signed by psychologists.
If one admits there is no such thing as a culture-free test, projec-
tive or otherwise, one ought in theory to be delighted to have native
or folk projective tests, that is, projective materials devised by a
people themselves. Consider the New Year's practice found in Fin-
land and elsewhere which calls for boiling lead and pouring bits of
it into water. Someone then "reads" the shapes formed by the lead
to predict the fortunes of individuals in the coming year. Reading
lead shapes is somewhat similar to reading inkblots. By the same
token, there are folkloristic analogues to sentence completion,
word association, or storytelling psychological tests. For example,
inherited." "The archetype-let us never forget this-is a psychic organ present in all
of us." See Psyche & Symbol: A Selection from the Writings of C. G. Jung, Violet S. de
Laszlo, ed. (Garden City, 1958), pp. 8, 117, 15, 108, 123.
10 Gardner Lindzey, Projective Techniques and Cross-Cultural Research (New York,
1961). There have been relatively few attempts to study folklore as projection. See
Bert Kaplan, "Psychological Themes in Zuni Mythology and Zuni TAT's," The
Psychoanalytic Study of Society, 2 (1962), 255-262; George R. Horner, "Folklore as a
Psychological Projective System," The Conch, III, no. 1 (March, 1971), 3-13. See also
J. L. Fischer, "The Sociopsychological Analysis of Folktales," Current Anthropology, 4
(1963), 235-295, and the section entitled "The Analysis of Folklore" in Victor Bar-
nouw, Culture and Personality (Homewood, 1963), pp. 301-324. One of the best
studies of the projective aspect of folklore is Melville Jacobs, The Content and Style of
an Oral Literature (Chicago, 1959).
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

M L N 1507
there is a popular American party game in which "It" is sent out of
the room while supposedly those remaining are engaged in making
up a story. "It" is told that he will be summoned shortly and asked
to guess the story plot. After "It' leaves, the group members are
told that there is no story, but that "It" will make up his own story
upon his return. The trick is that to each of "It's" questions, the
group will answer only yes or no, according to whether the last
orthographic letter in "It's" question is a vowel (plus "y") or a con-
sonant. Thus if "It" asks, "Is it a story about me?" a member of the
group would answer yes. The question, "Does it take place on
earth?" would require a no response. (In a variant, the rule is 'yes' if
the last letter of the last word falls within the first half of the
alphabet, no for the last half.) What usually happens in this game is
that the story "reconstructed" by "It" often reveals interesting
facets of "It's" own personality. A psychologist would probably say
that "It" projects his own anxieties, thoughts, wishes, etc. upon the
minimal structuring provided by the mechanical replies of the
group.
The above party game and most of the examples of folklore I
shall discuss will be familiar ones. This is intentional. Typically
anthropologists offer elaborate exegeses of some esoteric symbolic
system which their audience cannot really confirm or reject inas-
much as they are completely dependent upon the data provided by
the anthropologist for any knowledge of the culture under exami-
nation. It is for this reason that I have chosen examples from
American folklore. I assume that most Americans will have per-
sonal acquaintance with the data. Let us begin with a jump rope
rhyme."
Fudge, fudge, tell the judge
Mama's got a newborn baby.
It ain't no girl, it ain't no boy
Just a newborn (or 'common', or 'plain ol', or 'ordinary') baby.
Wrap it up in tissue paper
Throw (send) it down the elevator.
First floor, miss
Second floor, miss, etc. (until the jumper misses)
11 This is a standard jump rope rhyme. See Roger D. Abrahams, Jump Rope
Rhymes: A Dictionary (Austin, 1969), p. 51, # 148, for references to several
dozen versions of "Fudge, fudge." For another jump rope rhyme with obvious
sibling rivalry, see Abrahams, pp. 79-80, #224, "I had a little brother," with the
very tense of the verb in the first line revealing wishful thinking.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1508 ALAN DUNDES
What does this rhyme mean? Were we to ask little girls jumping
rope to it to give us a full explication de texte, what would we elicit?
What does "fudge" mean? Here we have a typical piece of concrete
data and what would conventional semiotics do with it? Why is
there ajudge? Is it merely a matter of 'judge' rhyming with 'fudge',
or 'fudge' rhyming with 'judge'? Folklore is admirably concise and I
am persuaded that whatever is contained in a folkloristic text is
meaningful-even if we do not always have full insight into what
the meanings may be. What I am unalterably opposed to is the all
too commonly vouchsafed platitude that folklore is bound to con-
tain irrational nonsense which has no meaning. Why would indi-
viduals bother to remember something and repeat it with such
gusto if it had no meaning? It seems clear that if an item remains in
tradition, it must have meaning for the carriers of the tradition.
We can see that the jump rope rhyme reflects sibling rivalry. A
newborn baby is a threat to the older children who may resent all
the attention paid to it by their parents. We know that there is often
a wish on the part of older children to dispose of the new baby.
Wishful thinking and wish fulfillment are, of course, widely found
in folklore.12 There is more than a hint that Mama has committed a
crime in producing a sibling rival. The crime is signalled in the first
line insofar as a judge is to be informed (and possibly the punish-
ment for the 'crime' of throwing the baby away is projected to the
judge). But why fudge? If one thinks of the color and texture of
fudge, and is also familiar with infantile sexual theory, one can
arrive at a possible explanation. In the days before sex education
was taught in elementary school, young children in our culture did
not always understand the true nature of childbirth. After having
been told by a parent that a baby brother or sister was present in
mother's obviously expanding abdomen and that it would soon
come out to join the family, the often bewildered child frequently
assumed that this new baby would come out of the stomach area the
same way the child understood that all materials exited from its
own stomach, namely, via the anus. The equation of feces with
babies is reported extensively in the psychoanalytic literature, but I
doubt that any little girl jumping rope would offer such an in-
terpretation of the possible meaning of 'fudge.' Yet there is addi-
12 One of the first studies of this important characteristic of folklore is Franz
Ricklin, Wishfulfillment and Symbolism in Fairy Tales (New York, 1915).
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

M L N 1509
tional evidence, for cultural symbols rarely occur in unique single
texts. Another children's rhyme, though not one used for jumping
rope, goes as follows:
Milk, milk, lemonade
Around the corner, fudge is made.
Gestures accompanying this rhyme point in turn to several areas of
female anatomy (breasts, vagina, and anus). However distasteful or
crude one may find the rhyme, one cannot very well deny the
explicit equation of fudge and feces. Returning to our original
jump rope rhyme, we can now better understand the action taken.
Wrap it up in tissue (toilet) paper, throw it down the elevator. The
new baby is 'giftwrapped to go,' namely, to be flushed down the
toilet-elevator. Notice also that the more skillful the jumper, the
greater the number of floors or distance the baby is sent away,
thereby providing a most effective means of 'passing' judgment
on or "wasting" a sibling rival.
It should not be necessary to say that sibling rivalry is a normal
feature of family life. However, since parents often interfere with
or restrict overt acts of violence directed by one child towards
another, it is clear that some outlet is necessary for the expression
of the hostility which is bound to occur. Rhymes against babies are
just as healthy as are rhymes against parents, e.g., Step on a crack
(line); break your mother's (father's) back (spine). In terms of
projection, it would be interesting to know whether individual chil-
dren intentionally stepped on sidewalk cracks or intentionally
avoided doing so, and then correlating such behavior with the overall
personalities of such children and their stated attitudes towards
each parent.
Children's projections of parents occur more commonly in nar-
rative form than in rhymes. Fairy tales, for instance, are essentially
stories about children and their relationships to siblings and pa-
rents. The "step" relationship is a convenient device to allow full-
fledged hatred. A girl can, with clear conscience, hate wicked step-
sisters, or a wicked step-mother. Fairy tales with girl protagonists
may include both wicked sibling rivals as well as a wicked mother in
the form of a step-mother or witch. Fairy tales with boy heroes may
include the same kind of wicked brothers plus a male antagonist in
the form of a monster (e.g., dragon) or a giant. Let me select one
fairy tale found primarily in England and the United States to
illustrate the nature of symbolic projection. Once upon a time, a
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1510 ALAN DUNDES
boy named Jack lived alone with his mother! That very opening
should give pause to anyone with a psychological bias. In boy-
centered fairy tales, the father is often portrayed as missing or
dead-which allows the boy to be "alone with his mother." (In
girl-centered fairy tales, the mother is similarly missing or deceased
which allows the girl to be alone with her father.) As most will
remember, Jack trades his milk-giving cow to an old man who gives
him some beans in exchange. Jack's mother, insists at the sight of
the beans, that he throw them out of the window. (I shall forbear
from commenting upon each and every symbol.) The next day, a
huge beanstalk is discovered. Jack's mother begs him not to as-
cend, but he disobeys. Up in the beanstalk world, there is a can-
nibalistic giant who often in some vague way is linked with Jack's
father-e.g., the giant allegedly stole Jack's father's treasures. For-
tunately, someone up there helps Jack. It is Mrs. Giant. Did it ever
strike you as somewhat peculiar that Mrs. Giant would help a total
stranger, a young boy, taking sides against her own husband? (In
this Oedipal projection, the upper world is an extension of the
lower one.) In this connection, it may be worth recalling where Mrs.
Giant hides Jack-it is in her oven. (The symbolism of ovens in
European folklore generally is quite consistent.13 Consider, for
example, the initial morpheme of the verb "fornicate" and in this
context, note the poetic justice in the best known version of tale
type 327A,14 Hansel and Gretel, according to which Gretel tricks
the witch into being burned to death in her own oven.) In any
event, the stupid old giant fails to see Jack hiding in his wife's oven.
Finally, Jack rushes down the stalk with the giant in close pursuit.
As it happens, down at the bottom of the stalk waiting with a hatchet
in her hand is Jack's mother. Taking the hatchet, Jack cuts down
the stalk, an act which causes the death of the giant. The story ends
with Jack living happily ever after with his mother.15
Surely the maternal aid in both the upper and lower worlds can be
understood as a projection of the young boy's point of view in
13 Sigmund Freud, A General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis (New York, 1953), p.
170.
14 Tale type numbers refer to Stith Thompson, The Types of the Folktale, FFC
184 (Helsinki, 1961). Jack and the Beanstalk is tale type 328, The Boy Steals
the Giant's Treasure.
15 For further psychoanalytic commentary on this tale, see Alan Dundes, ed.,
The Study of Folklore (Englewood Cliffs, 1965), pp. 107-113.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

M L N 1511
terms of an Oedipal struggle against the villainous giant. From Jack
and the Beanstalk, I should like to turn to another example of
projection. This example is not folklore, but it is dependent upon
folklore and folkloristic associations. One reason for using the
example is to show that projection is such an important device that
it may utilize even historical events rather than relying solely upon
the traditional forms found in folklore proper.
The example of projection I have in mind is the first lunar land-
ing. I must insist that nothing of what I am about to present should
be understood as in any way demeaning the very real and splendid
achievement of landing on the moon. My sole purpose is to try to
demonstrate how much folkloristic projection plays in all our
lives-whether we are aware of it or not.
First of all, we have the name of the lunar mission. It was Apollo.
I should stress here that it is precisely in the selection of names and
symbols that those of us interested in psychoanalytic semiotics are
afforded prime data. It might well be erroneous to interpret a
detail which was an integral part of the scientific apparatus, but the
choice of the name Apollo is not such a detail. In theory, the mis-
sion might have had any one of a hundred names. The name
Apollo is a conscious or perhaps unconscious invocation of tradi-
tional mythology. And in mythology round the world, we find the
most pressing problems of earthly bodies projected onto heavenly
bodies. In this light, constellations and their names in different
cultures may appropriately be studied as native projective
Rorschach gestalts. As for planet names in our own culture, it is
interesting that earth falls between Venus and Mars, love and war,
perhaps even life and death. Has earth separated god and goddess
lovers just as in the widely diffused Oedipal sky-father/earth-
mother myth (Motif A 625, World parents: sky-father and earth-
mother)16 in which a culture hero forcibly pushes the sky back out
of the connubial embrace with the earth in order to provide living
space for man?
To return to the lunar mission, who is Apollo and what, if any, is
his relationship to the moon? Apollo the sun is the brother of Diana
the moon. Thus mythologically speaking we have a brother trying
16 The motif number is from Stith Thompson, Motif-Index of Folk Literature, 6
vols. (Bloomington, 1955-1958). The separation of the parents is included
under motif A 625.2, Raising of the sky.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1512 ALAN DUNDES
to reach or land on his sister. And what are the semantic associa-
tions of Diana? One of the most obvious is virginity. Diana is tradi-
tionally associated with chastity.
Once the projective metaphor has been pointed out, it is easy
enough to see its consistency. Among the principal problems to be
overcome in the Apollo missions was gaining enough power to
escape the gravitational pull of the earth. The standard term for
this power was "thrust." Keeping in mind that the mythological
associations of earth include 'mother,' we have the astronauts try-
ing to get up enough thrust to escape the gravitational pull of
mother earth. (I shall not dwell on the symbolism of rockets other
than to recall that "to have a rocket in my pocket" can be a
euphemistic phrase for masturbation (cf. "pocket pool").)
I have spoken of the name of the mission, but what were the
names of the three astronauts and who was the first man on the
moon? Neil Armstrong. Why was Armstrong the first? Was it mere
alphabetical order? No, it was not because in that event, Aldrin
would have been first, not Armstrong, or Collins. Could it have
been the association of Jack Armstrong, the all-American boy, hero
of radio adventure serials of several decades past? And could it
have been the very name Armstrong was deemed appropriate be-
cause it literally refers to a strong body extremity? A well placed
television camera allowed all other earthlings to voyeuristically
watch as Armstrong's leg emerged from the capsule and stepped
upon the surface of the moon. Certainly it made symbolic sense for
the name of the first man to stand on the moon to begin with the
first letter of our alphabet. Who can remember the names of any of
the men who made the second lunar landing? The point is that the
moon could only be violated once. No one cares who the other
violaters were. It is, after all, only on a maiden voyage that a bottle
of champagne is broken over a ship's hull. Once on the moon, the
astronauts put up an American flag, a common symbolic ritual act
for claiming virgin land for one's mother country (or fatherland).
We may have here the same projection which led earlier genera-
tions of American explorers into what Henry Nash Smith has so
aptly termed the "Virgin Land."17 What did the astronauts bring
back as souvenirs of their conquest? Pieces of rock. In this context,
the whole mission involved going out to get a piece of virgin moon
17 Henry Nash Smith, Virgin Land: The American West as Symbol and Myth (New
York, 1957).
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

M L N 1513
to show off to one's peers back home-a super masculinity dream
come true! Americans surely wanted to get to the moon before the
Russians did. The fantasy I have just delineated is not a universal
one-in some cultures the moon is considered masculine rather
than feminine. But in American culture, the moon is definitely
feminine. It even has maternal associations of a cow jumping over it
or being made of green cheese. The image of a 'man in the moon'
may even suggest an idealized intrauterine one. The maternal as-
sociations of the moon hint at an Oedipal projection and in English,
the choice of the name Apollo at least permits the possibility of a
homonymic pun on sun/son. So the sun/son who leaves mother
earth to be the first to violate the virgin moon (sister, mother) may
well be related to American fantasy-regardless of the purely
scientific features of the mission.
The lunar mission brings to mind the interweaving of folklore
and history. The point is that historical events and personages may
serve as anchors for flights of projective fantasy. I believe many
historians seriously err in dismissing or ignoring elements which
they label as spurious or apocryphal. Folklore, as an item of folk
speech-think of the phrase "that's (just) folklore"-means error,
that is, something to be carefully weeded out of otherwise accurate
historical source material. As a folklorist, I have learned to respect
what the folk say and think about history regardless of the histori-
city of their words and thoughts. What happened is important, but
no less important is what people think happened or what people
wished had happened. Folk history may tell us more about folk
than about history, but surely that is worth knowing. The folk
history of George Washington, for example, includes his famous
confrontation with his father over the chopping down, not of a
beanstalk, but of a cherry tree. Actually, George, a son in that
anecdote, is more celebrated for his paternal role. Why is it, for
instance, that George is reputed to have slept in so many beds on
the east coast of the United States. Signs proclaim that George
Washington slept here, not ate, drank, or visited here. Of course, if
he is considered to be thefather of our country then the verb choice
is apt-just as the particular style of monuments erected to honor
him.18
18 For a slightly more detailed consideration of the George Washington
legend, see Alan Dundes, "On the Psychology of Legend," in Wayland Hand,
ed., American Folk Legend: A Symposium (Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1971), pp.
26-29.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1514 ALAN DUNDES
But can there be any validity to the projections discussed thus far?
I can anticipate the most obvious objection. The reader may have
watched the lunar landing himself and he did not think of any
associations of Apollo-Diana, brother-sister incest, etc. He did not
think of the lunar landing as a violation of the moon. Any tension
he may have felt was strictly due to his genuine concern for the
safety of the astronauts. But sometimes the tension was excessive.
Some individuals refused to believe that the lunar landing actually
occurred. Rather they assumed that the whole event was simply a
fictionalized television program. Several individuals suffered
breakdowns evidently precipitated by the successful lunar land-
ing.19 Here I must reiterate the important point that folkloristic
projection is often, though not always, unconscious. Rarely is the
nature of the projection consciously recognized. I am always
amused by would-be critics of the Oedipal reading of the Oedipus
story when they claim that the Freudian interpretation is invalid
because Oedipus didn't know that he was killing his father and
marrying his mother. Of course, he didn't know consciously. That
is precisely the point. It is the bringing of the unconscious into the
purview of the conscious which is difficult and painful for the
psyche. Projection is one of a number of psychological defense
mechanisms which provides an unconscious screen or arena for the
display of the causes of anxiety and it is for this reason that
folkloristic projections are so indispensable as tools in the human
arsenal for mental health.
The unconscious nature of symbols and projections does present
a serious challenge to those folklorists who are seeking meaning in
folklore. But materials which have entered the unconscious can
also be brought out of the unconscious. One characteristic which is
19 I must here express my thanks to Dr. Donald H. Stanford for having first
called my attention to the possible psychological significance of the lunar land-
ing. Dr. Stanford, a psychiatrist, had two patients, both latent homosexuals, who
were seriously affected by the lunar landing. Both required hospitalization im-
mediately following their television viewing of the landing. Dr. Stanford con-
tacted me initially to inquire about mythological or folkloristic associations sur-
rounding the moon. Subsequent discussions with Dr. Stanford convinced me
that the folkloristic features of the lunar mission did have psychological signifi-
cance not just for his patients but for Americans generally. For other interpre-
tations of the lunar mission, see Joseph Cambell, "The Moon Walk-The Out-
ward Journey," in Myths to Live By (New York, 1972), pp. 233-249; and Ian I.
Mitroff, The Subjective Side of Science: A Philosophical Inquiry into the Psychology of
the Apollo Moon Scientists (New York, 1974).
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

M L N 1515
helpful in the study of folkloristic projections is the play upon
'literal versus metaphorical.' Sometimes seeing projections as
literalizations of metaphors or, if one prefers, as metaphorical
transformations of literal statements can greatly aid in deciphering
the unconscious content of folklore. Let me illustrate this by briefly
considering an important detail of the American wedding ritual.
One of the high points of the ritual involves the bride's casting her
floral bouquet to the females in attendance. What is the meaning of
this act? I wish to reiterate my firm conviction that semiotics must
ultimately be concerned with meaning. One can analyze the struc-
ture of American weddings and note the binary oppositions be-
tween bride and groom, married and unmarried, etc., but unless
semiotics can take account of the symbolic, projective aspects of
ritual, it can never be more than a purely descriptive technique as
opposed to an explanatory one. The throwing of the bridal
bouquet involves homeopathic magic and therefore metaphor.
Homeopathic magic is functionally equivalent to metaphor just as
contagious magic is analogous to simile. Most poetic tropes have
structural analogues in types of magic. Synecdoche, for example,
corresponds to the principle of pars pro toto in magic practice. In
terms of the literalization of metaphor, the bride is through the
ritual act of throwing away her floral bouquet signifying her wil-
lingness or intention of being deflowered. Interestingly enough, the
flowers, once separated from the bride, furnish an example of
contagious magic inasmuch as the lucky girl who catches the
bouquet is said to be the next to marry.
I might mention several other examples of the literalization of
metaphor in American folklore. There is an American superstition
which states that if one wants to ensure that one's newborn baby
will rise in the world, one should carry it up a flight of stairs shortly
after birth. The metaphorical notion of rising in the world is thus
literally carried out. Literalization of metaphor can also occur in
folktales. I think, for instance of tale type 311, Rescue by the Sister,
in which there is a forbidden chamber. The heroine, as one may
remember, opens the interdicted door whereupon an egg or key
becomes bloody. The symbolism of tell-tale blood marking an egg
or key after opening a forbidden door seems to be a projection of
defloration. What is also of interest is the sight that the heroine sees
in the forbidden chamber. Commonly she finds the decapitated
bodies of her older sisters. The literalization of metaphor would be,
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1516 ALAN DUNDES
if I am correct, exemplified by the vivid depiction of girls who had
quite literally lost their maiden heads!
An even better example of the literalization of metaphor in
folkloristic projections may be found in yet another genre, namely
nursery rhymes. "There was an old woman who lived in a shoe; she
had so many children she didn't know what to do." Now what
possible connection could there be between a woman living in a
shoe and having a superabundance of children? Upon reflection, we
may recall that there is a traditional connection between shoes and
marriage. Not only does Cinderella find her prince charming
through the perfect fit between her foot and a glass slipper, but in
American culture, we continue to tie old shoes on the bumpers of
cars carrying newlyweds off on their honeymoon. With respect to
the Cinderella story (tale type 510A), it might be observed that very
few versions have the shoe made of glass. Cox in her 1892 study of
345 versions of Cinderella found only six instances of glass slippers.
However, the occurence of the glass slipper in the celebrated Per-
rault version of Cinderella may explain the widespread popularity
of this element. I shall refrain from commenting on the theory that
the slipper in question was not really made of glass but was rather a
mistranslation of the French word "vair" which was a kind of fur,20 a
theory which strongly suggests that interpretations of folklore can
involve almost as much symbolic projection as the folklore itself. The
mystery of the association of shoes with marriage and children is
partly solved by another version of the Mother Goose rhyme re-
ported from the Ozarks of the 1890's. "There was another old
woman who lived in a shoe. She didn't have any children; she knew
what to do." The consistency of the symbolism should be apparent.
In nursery rhymes, in fairy tales, in post-wedding customs, the same
symbolic equation is found. This supports the idea that symbol
patterns are culturewide. One could easily cite additional illustra-
tions, e.g., Cock a doodle doo; My dame has lost her shoe [a real
challenge for transplant surgeons]; Her master's lost his fiddling
stick. They don't know what to do."21 So it may be that participants in
20 For Cox's study, see Marian Roalfe Cox, Cinderella, Publications of the
Folk-Lore Society XXXI (London, 1892). For the statistics on the number of
versions containing the glass slipper as well as a discussion of "vair," see Cox, p.
506. For an earlier discussion of "vair," see W. R. S. Ralston, "Cinderella,"
Nineteenth Century, 6 (1879), 832-853.
21 This rhyme is #108 in the standard collection, Iona and Peter Opie, The
Oxford Dictionary of Nursery Rhymes (Oxford, 1959), pp. 128-129. "The old
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

M L N 1517
a wedding cannot articulate any rationale for the custom of tying
shoes to the car bumper, but that does not mean that the custom is a
"meaningless" survival. The marriage car carries off the shoe trophies
just as the groom will later carry his bride across the threshold of
their dwelling, the latter custom being perhaps a metaphor for the
successful initation of male dominated sexual intercourse.
Now I fear I may perhaps have done a serious disservice to my
thesis by having utilized so many examples of sexual symbolism.
Some may think that I have badly misconstrued the term semiotics
as being the scientific study of the "seamy." I must stress that pro-
jection in folklore is not limited to sexuality. Any anxiety-producing
topic can find expression in projective form. For example, there is
projection in the modern urban legend in which a family is obliged
to take its old grandmother along on a vacation trip. In a remote
area, grandmother dies and the family is forced to curtail its vaca-
tion. Strapping the body to the roof of the Volkswagen, the family
starts for home. Enroute the family stops for lunch during which
time the car plus grandmother's corpse is stolen. Sometimes the
absence of the body causes delay in probating grandmother's will. I
have argued that this legend reflects American attitudes towards
the older generation and towards death. In terms of wishful think-
ing, there is the wish that grandmother should die and that some-
one else should dispose of the body. In terms of the literalization of
metaphor, grandmother is "taken for a ride," if I may be permitted
to use the appropriate gangster idiom. The normally unutterable
mercenary interest in grandmother's demise also finds expression
in the concern about the delay in probate.
Similarly there is projection in the standard legend of the medi-
cal school prank in which a group of medical students crossing a
toll bridge leave a cadaver's arm holding the coin in the surprised
woman who lived in a shoe" is #546 in the same collection, pp. 434-435. Even
the conservative Opies seem aware of the symbolism inasmuch as they note that
"The shoe has long been symbolic of what is personal to a woman until mar-
riage." Similarly, Swedish folklorist Anna Birgitta Rooth in her comprehensive
modern study of Cinderella has a brief discussion of "The shoe as a sexual
symbol." See Rooth, The Cinderella Cycle (Lund, 1951), pp. 104-105. For other
folkloristic data concerning shoes, see Paul Sartori, "Der Schuh im Vol-
ksglauben," Zeitschrift des Vereins fur Volkskunde, 4 (1894), 41-54; 148-180; 282-
305; 414-427; and James E. Crombie, "Shoe-Throwing at Weddings," Folklore, 6
(1895), 258-281. For early studies of the erotic symbolism of shoes, see the en-
tries under "Shoe, Symbolism of," in Roger Goodland, A Bibliography of Sexual
Rites and Customs (London, 1931), p. 739.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1518 ALAN DUNDES
and shocked grasp of the tollbooth attendant. Medical students
have anxiety-at least initially-about handling cadavers and prob-
ably also about paying their way through life at the expense of the
health of their patients. After all, the families of patients are
charged for operations whether the operations are successful or
not. Doctors have to learn to be dispassionate objective practition-
ers who are able to leave their patients' medical problems, e.g.,
anatomical parts such as an arm, behind them even as these prob-
lems literally hold the lucrative financial rewards of medical prac-
tice. Notice that in this projection, the fear and shock of taking
money from a dead man's hand is displaced from the medical
students to the outside world, the tollbooth attendant.22
Racism is another anxiety-producing problem which is expressed
in folkloristic form. Let us briefly consider the folksong John
Henry. A popular folksong, this ballad tells the sad story of a black
steel-driver who wages a valiant struggle against the steam drill. He
wins the battle, but the victory is Pyrrhic for in the end John Henry
dies. I have had white middle class school teachers tell me they use
this folksong in the classroom as an example of Afro-American
folklore. They like the ballad's depiction of the increasingly impor-
tant issue of man versus machine. This is all well and good, but as a
projection, John Henry is little more than the white stereotype of
what black men should be. John Henry is strong, doggedly loyal to
the white boss, and he dies doing the white man's work. He is, in
short, a projection of the ideal "good nigger." He even dies with his
hammer in his hand-no threat there to the white womanhood of
the south. The ballad of John Henry is thus more part of white
folklore about blacks than Afro-American folklore, and its con-
tinued use in schools promoted the image of the strong, docile,
Uncle Tom figure of the black male so ardently desired by whites.
The unconscious projective aspects of folklore make its use all
the more insidious and perhaps dangerous inasmuch as few indi-
viduals are aware of the semiotic implications of the projection.
Racism is nonetheless virulent for its being unconscious. Many
whites may not see the racism in an advertisement for "flesh-
colored bandaids" but it is there all the same. A terse bit of Afro-
22 For further discussion of the medical school cadaver legend and the pre-
ceding grandmother legend, see Dundes, "On the Psychology of Legend," in
Wayland Hand, ed., American Folk Legend, pp. 31-36.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

M L N 1519
American folklore conveys a unique indictment of the use of white
folklore in classrooms containing black students. There's the young
black girl who asks a question of the mirror on the wall. "Mirror,
mirror on the wall, who's the fairest one of all?" and the mirror
answers, "Snow White, you black bitch, and don't you forget it!" In
an educational system and society where the values come from
white folklore, there is not much potential for a positive self-image
for black students. Americans inherited from Europe an entire
semiotic of color in which black was evil and white was good. Even a
lie, if it's white, is all right. "Black is beautiful" is a conscious at-
tempt by the black community to fight the semantic set of countless
words (blackmail, blackguard, blackball, black list, etc.) which assert
the contrary.23
Racist projections are also found in literature and I do not want to
give the impression that projections are limited to folkloristic form.
Let me cite just one illustration from children's literature. Charlie
and the Chocolate Factory is a popular children's book which was
made into a motion picture. The cover blurb calls it "an uproarious
morality tale by the world-renowned storyteller, Roald Dahl." And
it is a highly moral story poking fun as it does at a gluttonous eater,
a spoiled little rich girl, a fanatic gum chewer, and a television
addict. But as some readers may recall, there is a chocolate factory
run by Willy Wonka. Who is it that does all the work at the factory?
The work is done by the Oompa-Loompas. Who are the
Oompa-Loompas? They are pygmies "imported direct from Af-
rica." "Their skin is almost black" and Willy Wonka "shipped them
all over here, every man, woman and child in the Oompa-Loompa
tribe. It was easy." He "smuggled them over in large packing cases
with holes in them, and they all got here safely." "They love danc-
ing and music."24 According to Willy Wonka, the Oompa-Loompas
came willingly because they were told they could have all they
wanted to eat (at the company store)! It is hard to know whether
this white porjection of contented 'lumps' of black slave labor is
conscious or unconscious on the author's part, but its potential
impact upon a generation of children (and parents) in terms of
continuing a stereotype is devastating. Curiously, the title of the
23 For a general discussion of this point, see Eldridge Cleaver, "As Crinkly as
Yours," in Alan Dundes, ed., Mother Wit from the Laughing Barrel: Readings in the
Interpretation of Afro-American Folklore (Englewood Cliffs, 1972), pp. 9-21.
24 Roald Dahl, Charlie and the Chocolate Factory (New York, 1964), pp. 72-76.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1520 ALAN DUNDES
book (and the name of the little boy hero) revolves around the
name Charlie, the standard slang term in Afro-American folklore
for the 'white man.'
Projections are to be found in all types of literature including
comics, television, and motion pictures. My plea for psychoanalytic
semiotics is based primarily upon folklore only because I am most
familiar with folkloristic data. It is equally imperative that popular
culture be understood as projective materials. One thinks of the
generic "Western" with its rugged individual hero who often has to
take the law into his own hands, vigilante style, in order to prevail
over the "bad guys" and to establish law and order, thereby protect-
ing property rights. Similarly, we might look at Star Trek which
relates the adventures of an eternally floating bastion of American
values in the context of a popular science fiction television program
series. Typically the space ship makes an uninvited visit to some
alien culture which somehow threatens the existence or safety of the
ship (or the ship is itself invaded by the alien culture). Often the
progress of the space ship is imperiled or stopped. Its leader
heroes, of obvious Anglo-Saxon ancestry (Kirk, Spock, Scotty,
McCoy), assisted by various assorted ethnic underlings who obey
rather than give orders, take whatever action they deem necessary
to free the ship. Since the ship's name is Enterprise, we have an all
too thinly disguised projection of what Americans will do in the
name of free enterprise. And what does the crew of the Enterprise
do? The usual solution consists of converting or destroying the
alien cultures. Only after such justifiable homicide can the United
Starship (=U.S.) Enterprise return to its set course-in accordance
with its 'manifest destiny.'25 It is not hard to see how the Western-
vigilante and Star Trek projections could lead to the American
officer in Viet Nam who explained in all seriousness that "It was
necessary to destory the village in order to save it."
Projection can involve placement in the far distant past or the far
25 I am indebted to Professor Arthur Asa Berger of San Francisco State Uni-
versity for the suggestion that Star Trek might be viewed as a projection of
American values. For details of Star Trek, see David Gerrold, The World of Star
Trek (New York, 1973). It might be argued that Star Trek's crew represents the
entire world rather than just the United States, but the world appears to be
ethnocentrically defined much as it is in the "World Series" baseball champion-
ships in which the 'world' boils down to just American (plus one Canadian) en-
tries.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

M L N 1521
distant future. This is why one can study projection in myth, the far
distant past, or projection in science fiction, the far distant future.
The plots and the dramatis personae are strikingly similar in both
myth and science fiction. In sum, it is the projection which is cru-
cial, not so much the time and place or local coloring. It is the
removal from reality to fantasy which allows the human spirit free
rein to portray its spiritual struggles and play out its moments of
anguish. Yet sometimes, even fantasy does not afford sufficient
disguise for such activities, not without recourse to what I would
call projective inversion.
Most of the projections discussed thus far have been more or less
direct translations of reality into fantasy. The code of symbols per-
mits a healthful rewriting of a problem on earth into a disguised
arena where it may be happily resolved. So the lunar landing
might be interpreted as an extended metaphor for the American
male's quest to break the silver (umbilical) cord or maternal apron
strings in order to seek a virgin bride. But there are some human
problems which evidently require more elaborate disguise.
One of the finest examples of projective inversion in folklore is
the one first analyzed by Otto Rank in his brilliant monograph, The
Myth of the Birth of the Hero, first published in 1909. In this classic
study, Rank attempts to explain why the Indo-European hero
should so often be born of a virgin mother and why he should be
abandoned to die immediately upon being born. According to
Rank, it is an Oedipal plot from the son's point of view. A virgin
mother represents a complete repudiation of the father and espe-
cially his normal necessary role in procreation.26 In Oedipal theory,
it is supposedly the son who would like to get rid of his father
(which would thereby reserve his mother for his exclusive use) but
a narrative in which a son deposed or disposed of his father would
produce considerable guilt. Thus, according to Rank, the child's
wish to get rid of the father is neatly transposed in the myth to the
father's getting rid of the child. Rank called this projection, but I
would call it projective inversion. The son's wishful thinking is
projected in inverted form so that the father does everything he
can to kill the son. One obvious advantage of such projective inver-
sion is the avoidance of guilt. The son need not feel guilt for want-
ing to get rid of his father inasmuch as the traditional fantasy
26 Otto Rank, The Myth of the Birth of the Hero (New York, 1959), p. 81.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1522 ALAN DUNDES
projects the 'crime' and the presumed responsibility for the crime
upon the victim. Projective inversion permits one to blame the
victim. Rather than feeling guilt, the son-hero can justifiably take
Oedipal style revenge and kill the villainous father figure.
In the psychological literature, it seems that both kinds of projec-
tion, that is, direct translation from inner thoughts to outward man-
ifestation, as well as what I am calling projective inversion, fall
under the same general rubric of projection. Freud, for example,
in his 1911 paper, "Psycho-Analytic Notes upon an Autobiographi-
cal Account of a Case of Paranoia," remarks how the "proposition 'I
hate him' becomes transformed by projection into another one: 'He
hates (persecutes) me, which will justify me in hating him'."27 I would
call the transposition of'I hate him' into 'He hates me' an example
of projective inversion. Moreover, in terms of a possible generative
grammar of folktales, one could imagine predictable rewrite rules
governing when a taboo-laden wish would be transformed-active
to passive, subject to object. Instead of the hero or heroine doing
something to a parent surrogate or sibling, the rival does that very
thing to the hero or heroine. Boys wishing to eliminate father fig-
ures can be rewritten as kings-fathers attempting to eliminate
sons. Girls wishing to eliminate mother figures can be rewritten as
queens-stepmothers attempting to eliminate daughters.
Insightful as Rank was with respect to the Oedipal features of the
standard Indo-European hero pattern, he seems to have missed the
analogous projective inversion in heroine (Electra) narratives.
Rank says, for example, "The father who refuses to give his daugh-
ter to any of her suitors, or who attaches to the winning of the
daughter certain conditions difficult of fulfillment, does this be-
cause he really begrudges her to all others, for when all is told he
wishes to possess her himself. He locks her up in some inaccessible
spot, so as to safeguard her virginity."28 It is not at all clear why
27 Sigmund Freud, Collected Papers, III (New York, 1959), p. 449. I have no
desire to become embroiled in any controversy over terminology. My impression
is that psychologists may not have sufficiently differentiated various subtypes of
projection. Bellak has proposed the term "inverted projection" to refer to in-
stances where reaction formation takes place prior to outward projection. Thus
"I love him" becomes "I hate him" through reaction formation and then "I hate
him" becomes "He hates me" through projection. See Gardner Lindzey, Projective
Techniques and Cross-Cultural Research, pp. 29-30.
28 The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, p. 80.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

M L N 1523
Rank is willing to accept the literalness of a father's concupiscence
for his daughter but not his presumed hatred of his newborn son.
If we examine a typical Electral folktale, e.g., tale type 706, The
Maiden Without Hands, we find projective inversion. The typical
girl's wish to eliminate her mother and marry her father is expressed
in projective form. The mother dies (not through any fault of
the girl) and the father wants to marry someone just like the dead
mother. After some search, he decides to marry his own daughter.
In the folktale, the heroine cuts her hands off because she will not
marry her father. Why should the heroine take this drastic action?
Those who would claim that the father's incestuous wish to marry
his daughter is a literal reflection of reality ought to offer some
explanation for the daughter's act of cutting her hands off. In part,
it might be a macabre literalization of a metaphor insofar as the
father has asked for his daughter's hand in marriage. But one diffi-
culty with this literal approach is: why should the daughter be
punished for the father's crime? On the other hand, if we assume
this might be an instance of projective inversion, then the father's
wish for the daughter is in fact an expression of the daughter's
unconscious wish for the father. This would explain why it is the
daughter, not the father, who is punished. Hands are commonly
used in initiating masturbatory fantasy and therefore they might
provide appropriate 'sinning' objects to be punished.
The rationale for the punishment of the girl is also relevant to
the fate of Cordelia in Shakespeare's King Lear. Critics have been
troubled by Cordelia's death. In the majority of the literary ver-
sions of the plot, Cordelia takes her own life. King Lear is derived
ultimately from "Love Like Salt" (tale type 923) which in turn is an
abridged version of a major form of the Cinderella cycle, namely
tale type, 510B, The Dress of Gold, of Silver, and of Stars (Cap o'
Rushes). As in tale type 706, The Maiden Without Hands, an appar-
ently lecherous father wants to marry his daughter. But if this
father-daughter incest is a projective inversion of a daughter's sex-
ual desire for her father, then the 'original' sin is Cordelia's and
Lear truly is "a man more sinn'd against than sinning." From this
perspective, Cordelia's triumph over her dead mother and her two
sibling rivals for the final exclusive attention of her father is a
punishable offense. Incidentally, the adaptation of this projective
inversion (tale type 510B) by Shakespeare means that King Lear is a
girl's fairy tale told from the father's point of view.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1524 ALAN DUNDES
In some versions of tale type 706, the maiden's hands are
miraculously restored, sometimes through the intervention of the
Virgin Mary herself. In the present context, it is worth remarking
that the Virgin Mary could be construed as a religious projection of
a young girl who is impregnated by a heavenly father. Christian
mythology, of course, has an Oedipal projection to go along with
the Electra projection. A hero who is born of a virgin mother may
represent the Oedipal ideal. As Rank observed, a virgin mother
means that one's father did not succeed in gaining sexual access to
one's mother. Moreover, the doctrine of consubstantiation claims
the son and the father are one, the begotten is the begetter.
Through this projection, one is doubly protected: one's mother is
virgin, and one is in some sense interchangeable with one's father.
According to this argument, Christian mythology is an ideal projec-
tion for European family structure, containing as it does both Oed-
ipal and Electral components. For those who are skeptical about
viewing mythological beings as projections of human beings, I
might mention that it is not only in Christianity that one finds
explicit references to god the father, among other kinship ter-
minological parallels. The ruling god of the Roman pantheon was
Jupiter whose name includes "piter," surely cognate with one of the
most widespread Indo-European roots, namely the one for father,
including Sanskrit "pitar-" and Latin "pater."29
Let me give an additional example of projective inversion
from modern American legend. The gist of the legend is a re-
port that Negro youths have castrated a young white boy in a
public bathroom. Like all legends, it is told as true, and in fact
several years ago (1969) it was reported repeatedly by telephone
to various police stations in San Francisco. The legend's sudden
popularity was almost certainly related to the discussion of the
bussing of school children in San Francisco to achieve desegre-
gation. Now historically one may ask which race has castrated
which race? It is surely whites who castrated blacks as punish-
ment for actual or imagined crimes. But in this exemplar of
urban folklore, through projective inversion, the whites have
metamorphosed their own fears of the stereotyped super-phallic
Negro male into a form where their victim becomes the aggres-
29 Carl Darling Buck, A Dictionary of Selected Synonyms in the Principal Indo-
European Languages (Chicago, 1949), p. 103.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

M L N 1525
sor. The wish to castrate black males is projected to those males
who are depicted as castrating a white boy. This makes it possi-
ble to blame the black victim for the crime the white would like
to commit. Just as in the myth of the birth of the hero, the
wisher can through projective inversion punish in fantasy not
himself but the victim of his aggression. It is the evil parent
(king, giant) who is guilty, not the child. It is the black who is
guilty, not the white.
It was no mere coincidence that the increased circulation of
the legend in the San Francisco Bay Area occurred at the same
time bussing was being discussed. This raises, once again, the
question of the interrelationship of historical event to folkloristic
projective fantasy. Some scholars tend to feel that historical and
psychological approaches are mutually exclusive, but I believe
this to be a serious error. Frequently a historical event may re-
kindle an old projection or inspire a new one. It has been
suggested, for example, that the elephant joke cycle of the early
1960's might be related to the rise of the Civil Rights movement
of the same period. Elephants, like blacks, are associated by
whites with African origins. In the joke cycle, elephants were
typically described in terms of color "Do you know why
elephants are gray? So you can tell them from bluebirds" and
in terms of making phallic leaps down from trees upon unsus-
pecting victims "Why do elephants climb trees? To rape squir-
rels." The Civil Rights movement aroused longstanding fears
among whites that the superphallic militant Negro male might
assert himself with respect to former white oppressors. As men-
tioned in the analysis of the previous legend, castration, sym-
bolic or literal, is one solution. How do you keep an elephant
from charging? Take away his credit card. How do you keep an
elephant from stampeding? Cut his 'tam peter off.30
In the same way, I believe it is possible to show historical roots for
other recent American folkloristic phenomena. For example, the
spate of "dead baby" jokes in the early 1970's provides a challeng-
30 For a more complete analysis of the elephant joke cycle, see Roger D.
Abrahams and Alan Dundes, "On Elephantasy and Elephanticide," Psychoanalytic
Review, 56 (1969), 225-241, reprinted in Dundes, Analytic Essays in Folklore, pp.
192-205. Incidentally, the play on "color" might be another example of the
literalization of metaphor occurring in folkloristic projections.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1526 ALAN DUNDES
ing instance. What's red and hangs from the ceiling? A baby on a
meathook. What's red and sits in the corner? A baby chewing on a
razor blade. It is never easy to make sense of nonsense, but that
does not mean that nonsense is meaningless. These jokes told by
post-pubertal adolescents may reflect simple sibling rivalry, but
that would not explain why this particular cycle became so popular
in the early 1970's. Sibling rivalry, after all, has presumably always
existed. I would hazard a guess that new techniques of contracep-
tion (including the pill) and especially the liberalized laws govern-
ing abortion have generated more discussion (and guilt) concern-
ing the "murder" of babies. Contraception and abortion measures
may have encouraged a higher incidence of sexual activity among
teenagers and this might also account for the expression of literally
murderous wishes that babies be eliminated.
Perhaps a more graphic example of the connection between his-
torical events and folkloristic fantasy is "streaking." Streaking con-
sists of one or more persons running naked through a public place.
Is it only coincidence that it became a national phenomenon during
the Watergate political scandal of the 1970's? I would argue that
streaking is a projective protest against the Watergate cover up.
Whatever individualistic exhibitionistic impulses streaking may
have fulfilled, it also served to emphasize the demand that Water-
gate details be uncovered or disclosed publicly. Accordingly, it
might be possible to say that streaking is in part a ritual literaliza-
tion of a metaphor. It is certainly interesting that once the Water-
gate coverup was stripped away, streaking stopped.
Whether or not a particular joke cycle, legend, or public ritual
derives from a historical impetus is not crucial for the present
argument. The issue is whether or not there is a projective aspect to
the collectivized forms of fantasy we call folklore. If there is such an
aspect, then I believe there are important implications for semiotics
which, as I have noted previously, tends to concentrate upon rules,
formulas, binary paradigms, and the like. If one examines the
gamut of semiotic studies which have been made thus far, one can
see that the projective aspect has been almost totally ignored. For
example, one of the finest examples, in my opinion, of semiotic
analysis is Paul Bouissac's insightful descriptions of various circus
acts. In his essay "Poetics in the Lion's Den: The Circus Act as a
Text," Bouissac analyzes the constituent elements of a lion act per-
formance. He even describes some of the many standard tricks as
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

M L N 1527
metaphorical, e.g., the lion walks in the center of the ring to be
ridden by the man, or the lion straddles two stools allowing the man
to bend under him and carry the lion on his shoulders. Bouissac's
analysis is fine as far as it goes.31 My point again is that semiotics
seems to stop with description, classification, and typology whereas
description, classification and typology ought to be beginnings not
ends. Circus acts, like zoological gardens, involve man's attitude
towards animals and towards animality-including human animal-
ity. Part of the thrill and pleasure in circus and zoo is the implicit
struggle of man versus animal. The animals are caged and kept in
check, just as man's own animal nature is supposed to be. Yet there
is always the possibility, the danger, or the risk one could call it, that
the animal will escape the bonds of man or to put it metaphorically
that emotion and passion will escape the bonds of reason.32 One of
the techniques used to keep the animal or animality in check con-
sists of requiring the animal, in this case, a lion, to perform human
acts. In terms of projective inversion, one is tempted to suggest that
although men would like to yield to "animal" desires and to per-
form animal acts, this is not a guilt-free wish. Hence, through in-
version, it is pretended that animals would like to be like humans.
The more human the behavior performed by the animal, the more
complete the projective inversion. The inversion is hinted at by
such tricks in which the animal is first ridden by the man and then
later is carried by the man. The latter trick would appear to reverse
the normal roles of man and beast. Whether or not my particular
analysis of a lion's act in terms of projection is valid, the issue it
seems to me is the necessity of adding a consideration of projection
to conventional semiotic analysis.
In my view, psychoanalytic semiotics could be applied to a wide
31 Paul Bouissac, "Poetics in the Lion's Den: The Circus Act as a Text," Mod-
ern Language Notes, 86 (1971), 845-857. For other essays by Bouissac, see "Pour
une semiotique du cirque," Semiotica, 3 (1970), 93-120; "On Jugglers and Magi-
cians: Some Aspects of the Semantics of Circus Performances," Journal of Sym-
bolic Anthropology, 1 (1973), 127-145.
32 Ujamlal Kothari in his brief essay, "The Animals and Their Symbolic Mean-
ings," American Imago, 19 (1962), 157-162, tends to be a bit simplistic and overly
doctrinaire. In the American rodeo, he sees the cowboy as ego with the wild
animals (horse, bull) as id. In the circus animal show, he similarly labels the
trainer as ego and the animals as id. Nevertheless, his attempt to view rodeo
and circus acts as projections of individual psychology helped stimulate my
analysis of Bouissac's data.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1528 ALAN DUNDES
variety of phenomena, folkloristic and otherwise. One could, for
example, imagine such a study of the bullfight. But besides study-
ing the structure of the bullring or the social hierarchy of the
various participants, one could also perceive the matador versus
the bull as a projection. It is not just man versus animal, culture
versus nature, but a projection of traditional male rivalry in
Spanish (and other Mediterranean) cultures. In a homosexual bat-
tle of masculinity, it is critical just who penetrates whom. If the
matador penetrates the bull properly, then the bull becomes
feminized (as symbolized by having one or more of his extremities
(tail, hoofs) cut off as trophies.)33 As a projective drama, the
bullfight is a ritualized cognate of ordinary verbal dueling as found
among adolescent youths. In fact, we have similar ritual behavior in
American culture.
One of the most common gestures, obscene or nonobscene, in
the United States consists of giving a rival or enemy the "digitus
impudicus" better known in folk parlance as "the finger." There
are endless variations in style and technique to "flipping the bird"
as it is termed in California, but the overall impact of the insult is
the same. Yet I suspect that relatively few Americans have ever
thought about precisely what the gesture signifies. It is enough to
know that to be the addressee of such a gesture constitutes suffi-
cient grounds to reply in kind or to engage in a physical fight. A
whole host of lesser phallic gestures share a similar import-I refer
to sticking out one's tongue or thumbing one's nose, often termed
the Shanghai gesture.34 The words which as often as not accom-
pany the gesture make the meaning fairly clear, e.g., fuck you,
screw you, up yours, etc. Strangely enough, even professional stu-
dents of obscenity appear to have missed the underlying semiotic
significance of this gesture cum locution. Since the famous four
letter word refers to a pleasurable act, Sagarin in The Anatomy of
Dirty Words, argues that to tell someone "go fuck yourself' as an
insulting order is absurd. He quotes Albert Ellis to the effect that it
would be more appropriate to give the command "go unfuck your-
33 John M. Ingham, "The Bullfighter: A Study in Sexual Dialectic," American
Imago, 21 (1964), 95-102.
34 For relevant scholarship, see Archer Taylor, The Shanghai Gesture, FFC 166
(Helsinki, 1956), reprinted in Taylor, Comparative Studies in Folklore: Asia-Europe-
America (Taipei, 1972), pp. 293-366.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

M L N 1529
self."35 What Sagarin and Ellis seem not to understand is that the
basic gesture signifies that the addressee is a passive homosexual.
To be the recipient of the phallic finger is to assume the 'female'
position or role. The idiom "to put someone down" reflects the
winner's stance while "to get the shaft" reflects the loser's. When an
opponent is urged to carry out the act all by himself, passive
homosexuality is coupled with implied imaginary masturbatory be-
havior. I might also mention that the present analysis of this ex-
tremely common gesture would explain why the word "ass" can
refer both to a woman's genitals (as in "a piece of ass") and to the
buttocks area-of a male (as in "I'm going to kick your ass.")
For those who think that such types of symbolic phallic fighting
are unusual, I would call their attention to the existence of compar-
able ritual phenomena in many other cultures. The cock fight, a
Balinese version of which was so admirably analyzed by Geertz,
showed how handlers attached spurs consisting of "razor sharp,
pointed steel swords, four or five inches long" to the legs of their
cocks with the hope of annihilating the cocks of their opponents.36
From the point of view of symbolic projection, the cockfight is
isomorphic with kite-fighting in which men attach broken glass to
their kite strings and then once the kites are aloft, the men ma-
neuver so as to sever the kites of their rivals.
The possibility of identifying projective isomorphisms in
folkloristic fantasies opens up a new dimension in the study of
folklore. Folkloristic phenomena which may be historically unre-
lated may nevertheless share a common projective structure and
function. For example, I earlier alluded to George Washington as
35 Edward Sagarin, The Anatomy of Dirty Words (New York, 1962), p. 143.
Some of the scholarship on the word includes Allen Walker Read's essay, "An
Obscenity Symbol," American Speech, 9 (1934), 264-278, and Leo Stone, "On the
Principal Obscene Word of the English Language," International Journal of
Psycho-Analysis, 35 (1954), 30-56. If I were as speculatively venturesome as
Stone, I might propose that the "cul" in the word "masculine" were related to
the Latin root "culus" for buttocks, implying that a man as opposed to a boy
exercised complete control over his anal area, that is, he kept it safe from
homosexual phallic attack. For a Turkish example of this widespread Mediter-
ranean ritual means of proving one's masculinity, see Alan Dundes, Jerry W.
Leach, and Boar Ozk6k, "The Strategy of Turkish Boys' Verbal Dueling
Rhymes," Journal of American Folklore, 83 (1970), 325-349.
36 Clifford Geertz, "Deep Play: Notes on the Balinese Cockfight," Daedalus,
101 (1972), 1-37, reprinted in Geertz, The Interpretation of Cultures (New York,
1973), pp. 412-453.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1530 ALAN DUNDES
our founding father. Why do we Americans have founding fathers
and no founding mothers? In the various recountings of the
"birth" of our nation, we invariably find references to forefathers
and founding fathers. This reflection of male chauvinism goes back
to Old World folkloristic projections which not only consistently
deny women's role in procreation, but which in fact insist upon
depicting men as fulfilling the role singlehandedly.
In a "man's world," women themselves are defined in terms of
men. Before marriage, a girl is in theory a "virgin," a term evi-
dently derived from the Latin word for man (vir).37 If to be mar-
ried, a woman gives up her maiden name which is, of course, her
father's name, and exchanges it for her husband's name. At her
wedding, she is pronounced "wife" in the phrase "man and wife."
Wife is a term like woman which is defined in relationship to man,
e.g., with man. (It is theoretically possible for the pronouncement
to have been "man and woman" or even "woman and husband.")
The linguistic derivation of "woman" from "man" is also literally
expressed in mythic projective form as in the creation of Eve from
Adam's rib. But the irony is that even though woman may derive
from man, man in fantasy tries to become a womb-man, that is, a
man with a womb. In an Old Testament setting where the most
famous bosom belongs to Abraham, it is no surprise to learn of
Noah's construction of a womb-like ark which floats in a flood for
approximately nine months. Similar examples abound in classical
mythology. One might mention the sowing of dragon's teeth to
produce all-male offspring, or the marvelous creation of Athene
from the brow of Zeus, making her a truly literal male brainchild.
The bolstering of male egos via folkloristic projections continues in
modern America. A rotund Santa Claus delivers gifts down our
chimneys, the very same chimneys through which male storks de-
liver the babies they carry! Perhaps an even more striking male
usurper of female procreativity is the Easter Bunny who delivers
eggs! These various and sundry folkloristic projections are clearly
not historically related-there is no connection between the stork as
the bringer of babies and the Easter Bunny. But from the perspec-
tive afforded by psychoanalytic semiotics, they may be seen as shar-
ing common projective content.
37 If "gin" were understood as a snare or net, then a virgin would be literally
a 'man trap'! In any case, words like virgin and virago indicate that women are
described using men as a basic frame of reference.
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

M L N 1531
There is yet one additional point I should like to make about
projection in folklore. I fear I may have implied that viewing
folklore as projective material is a mechanical, reductionistic
technique. Quite the contrary is the case, for there is great variety
in the projective dimensions of even a single item of folklore. One
may recall that I began this whole discussion with the statement
that folklore means something and that it may mean different
things to different performers and to different audiences. To the
extent that all artistic creativity is autobiographical, all artistic
creativity is projective. Moreover, the way in which individuals in-
terpret artistic creativity is also autobiographically projective. Each
age and each individual in an age is free to interpret art, music, and
literature anew. And so it is with folklore. It is not simply a matter,
then, that folklore as fantasy contains projective material. Each
individual who tells a tale or who hears a tale cannot help but
project his own personality into that tale. This is why the study or
projection in folklore cannot be limited to the text alone. The pro-
cess of projection also occurs in the very act of communicating an
item of folklore.
Let me illustrate the multiplicity of meanings or the projective
potential of a single text with a final example. This text was related
to me in 1964 by a black male informant from Alabama. "Governor
Wallace of Alabama died and went to heaven. After entering the
pearly gates, he walked up to the door of a splendid mansion and
knocked. A voice inside exclaimed, "Who dat?" Wallace shook his
head sadly and said, "Never mind, I'll go the other way." First of all,
the item is older than 1964 inasmuch as a similar joke was told
during World War II with Adolf Hitler as the protagonist con-
fronted by a voice in heaven with a pronounced Jewish accent. In
the present version, the projective aspects include the wishful
thinking (for Wallace's death) and Wallace's being sent to hell by his
own prejudice. The historical fact of Governor Wallace's having
stood dramatically at the door of the University of Alabama to deny
admission to black students is also relevant (as is no doubt the
context of a black informant telling the joke to a white folklorist).
But the joke may function as a projective text for whites as well as
blacks. What is understood by individual whites when they hear the
stereotyped dialect "Who dat?" Clearly the implication is that a
Negro is inside the mansion. But individuals differ markedly as to
the identity of the Negro voice. Some think it is God; others think it
might be Saint Peter. A few assume it is a doorman or gatekeeper
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

1532 ALAN DUNES
or other menial. The joke itself does not say. I would argue that it is
projection on the part of the interpreter in making ajudgement as
to the identity of the speaker. Similarly, some whites claim they
understood from "Who dat?" that heaven is now integrated, while
others assumed that heaven has been completely "taken over" by
Negroes. None of this is articulated in the joke proper, but it is part
of the joke as semiotic text. Folklore is not only projective material,
but it allows if not encourages projection on the part of participants
in the act of communicating folklore. In fact, I would go so far as to
argue that if folklore did not provide a socially sanctioned outlet
for projection, it would almost certainly cease to exist. The problem
in folkloristics is that while we have literally thousands upon
thousands of folklore texts recorded-think of all the folktales,
folksongs, and legends in print, the projective part of the semiotic
text has not been recorded and so it is that we continue to have lore
without reference to folk.
If the interpretation or understanding of a folkloristic item also
involves projection, then it is perfectly obvious that scholarship in
general has a projective aspect. Maybe there are even national
characterological tendencies in scholarship just as there are un-
questionably individual idiosyncratic biases at work no matter how
purportedly objective any scholar claims to be. This means that
there could be a personal projective aspect to my present argument
that folklore fantasy may be based upon projection. Yet if there is
truth in dreams, then there may be truth in dreams within dreams
as well. So whatever my personal need may be to interpret folklore
in terms of projection as opposed to listing identifying motif num-
bers or segmenting folkloristic discourse into elegant syntagmatic or
paradigmatic schemata, I would hope that there is notwithstanding
some objective validity to the notion of treating folklore as projective
material.
From this all too cursory consideration of selected examples of
jump rope and nursery rhymes, fairy tales, legends, and rituals, I
have tried to show that projection is an inherent feature of folklore.
Whether the issue is sibling rivalry, Oedipal or Electral impulses,
male envy of female procreativity, or racism, projection offers a
guilt-free means of exploring the problem. If semiotics is to be-
come a seminal science of signs and symbols, it must be willing and
able to analyze fantasy as fantasy, that is, in terms of projection. For
humans, projection provides protection. Folklore although collec-
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

M L N 1533
tivized fantasy does meet the psychological needs of individuals.
Indeed it is literally and figuratively custom-made for the purpose.
If projection provides a means of translating inner thoughts into
outer expression, then psychoanalytic semiotics ought to try to
show from close analysis of such expressions what these inner
thoughts are. By this means, psychoanalytic semiotics could become
a kind of magic lantern which might afford new illumination for us
in our unceasing quest to study and enjoy some of the marvels of
the mind of man.
University of California, Berkeley
This content downloaded from 5.151.133.4 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:27:14 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms