4 
An Overview of 
Psychological 
Measurement 
JUM C. NUNNALLY 
I. Introduction 
Because this book is being written for clinical psychologists, psychiatrists, and kin-
dred professionals, in this chapter it will be assumed that the reader is already famil-
iar with fundamental issues relating to behavioral measurement and, consequently, 
that there will be no need to discuss low-level principles. Rather, the discussion will 
center on controversial issues that are of immediate importance to the professional 
clinician or researcher in the behavioral sciences. Whereas the examples chosen for 
this chapter to illustrate principles of measurement are particularly applicable to 
clinical diagnosis, the principles are quite general to empirical science. Because some 
methods of statistical and mathematical analysis are intimately related to the de-
velopment and use of measurement methods, critical comments will be made about 
some prominent approaches to statistical analysis, but details regarding their ap-
plications will be left to referenced sources rather than be discussed in detail here. 
(Any reader who is not already familiar with fundamental principles of psychomet-
ric theory and analysis, or would like a refresher course in that regard, might want 
to consult my book Psychometric Theory, 1978.) 
I started writing about the generality of measurement problems in science and 
the usefulness of related methods of mathematical analysis long before I had the 
actual experience to substantiate the case, e.g., in my first book on psychological 
measurement (1959). I sensed this generality of principles, and, more importantly, 
I was told this was so by older and wiser hands who specialized in various aspects 
of psychological measurement, e.g., in the lectures of the great L. L. Thurstone. As 
I gradually became involved as a consultant or participant in some manner or 
another in a wide variety of projects, I came to realize how genuinely true such state-
JUM C. NUNNALLY • 
Department of Psychology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 
37203. 
97 
B. B. Wolman (ed.), Clinical Diagnosis of Mental Disorders
© Plenum Press, New York 1978

98 
JUM C. NUNNALLY 
ments are regarding the generality of measurement methods and attendant meth-
ods of analysis. I have found similar principles to apply in an extremely wide vari-
ety of scientific issues in psychology, psychiatry, numerous fields of medicine, and 
law, and in special issues in the physical sciences and engineering, particularly bio-
medical engineering. Indeed, I have been surprised at the commonality of issues re-
garding psychological measurement that runs through these various disciplines. I 
have been even more surprised to find that some research issues regarding what I 
had thought of as "psychometrics" were more easily testable on physiological vari-
ables such as brain waves and pupillary response than on more conventional psy-
chological measures such as achievement tests in arithmetic and personality inven-
tories relating to adjustment. 
1.1. Science and Clinical Art 
A great deal of ink has been spilled and unkind words have been said regard-
ing the requirements for psychometric methods in research as opposed to clinical 
practice. Amid unseemly snickers, basic researchers (primarily those who specialize 
in psychometrics) claim that many of the clinicians' would-be measures lack the 
refinements of standardization, with all the name implies, and that many of them 
are at the level of crystal-ball gazing and soothsaying psychologizing. With indig-
nant response, the clinicians have claimed that many of the supposedly well-honed 
tools of the basic researchers concern only surface-layer trivia and fail to touch the 
deep richness of human psychological processes. When the partisan rudeness is 
wrung out of them, both points of view contain a germ of truth; and the outlooks 
on psychometric theory and analysis for basic science and clinical practice should 
be compatible. 
The squabbles about measurement methods and indeed the inherent problems 
of measurement themselves relate to the fact that it simply is difficult to study peo-
ple. The basic scientist is frequently frustrated by the inability to conduct experi-
ments that produce interesting results, and the clinician is frequently frustrated by 
the intractability of patients to be understood or to lend themselves to successful 
treatment. Although psychological phenomena are the most intriguing with which 
any basic researchers or clinical practitioners deal (indeed, one finds this sentiment 
expressed by people in disciplines far removed from the behavioral sciences), work-
ing in the people-oriented disciplines requires tolerance of ambiguity and the abil-
ity to operate on low-percentage-of-reward schedules. The difficulties of finding 
adequate measurement methods for prominent theoretical constructs have had 
some adverse effects on at least some individuals in both basic science and applied 
work, or at least so it would seem from my own personal contacts and what is said 
in print. Some of the more hard-nosed, brass-instrument, basic researchers in psy-
chology (some of the very best ones, so I would judge) have retreated into the study 
of extremely simple processes relating to memory, reaction time, and perception-
as much or more because the phenomena are easily subjected to measurement and 
experimental control as because they are intrinsically interesting to the investiga-
tors or anyone else. In contrast, some of our clinical brethren, in despair of finding 
standardized measures of truly meaningful human attributes, have retreated into a 
holistic, existential jargon. In this heady atmosphere, one is not sure whether the 
goal is to develop clinical practice, a new religion that considers Zen Buddhism as