Perspectives on Psychological Science
2015, Vol. 10(3) 346­–356
© The Author(s) 2015
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1745691615576761
pps.sagepub.com
In 2012, the home decor market was estimated to be gross-
ing as much as $65.2 billion per year in the United States 
alone (Bosari, 2012). In the same year, Better Homes and 
Gardens had a circulation in the United States of over 7.5 
million. TV programs on homes are enormously popular, 
too. HGTV (Home and Garden Television), an entire TV 
channel (and Web site) devoted to buying, selling, and fix-
ing up homes, attracted over 70 million monthly viewers in 
the first quarter of 2013, with shows like Renovation Raiders 
regularly drawing audiences above 6 million (HGTV, 2013). 
These and many other examples suggest that people care a 
great deal about their home spaces. In light of all the atten-
tion, energy, and resources that people put into their homes, 
one might expect the home to be a prime domain of psy-
chological research. However, little empirical attention has 
been directed to residential spaces.
Despite this neglect by empirical researchers, theorists 
and practitioners have long emphasized the psychological 
significance of homes (Hayward, 1975). Theorists ranging 
from Carl Jung (e.g., 1963) to Clare Cooper-Marcus (e.g., 
1995) have proposed that of all places, the home has a par-
ticularly powerful symbolic and psychological significance. 
That is, the home is more than a place in which an indi-
vidual resides but rather a unique place where a person’s 
past, present, and future selves are reflected and come to 
life. On the basis of a series of interviews with home own-
ers, Cooper-Marcus (1995) argued that the home is a place 
that reflects the character and identity of those who dwell 
within it.
Empirical research in environmental psychology has 
provided support for the special role of home in peoples’ 
minds, identifying the characteristics that distinguish the 
idea of “home” from merely a place of residence (Smith, 
1994a). Qualities such as community, privacy, self-expres-
sion, personal identity, and warmth are used to describe 
576761 PPSXXX10.1177/1745691615576761Graham et al.Psychology of Home Environments
research-article2015
Corresponding Author:
Lindsay T. Graham, Department of Psychology, University of Texas at 
Austin, 1 University Station A8000, Austin, TX 78712 
E-mail: lindsaytgraham@gmail.com
The Psychology of Home Environments:  
A Call for Research on Residential Space
Lindsay T. Graham1, Samuel D. Gosling1,2, and  
Christopher K. Travis3
1University of Texas at Austin; 2University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; and  
3Sentient Architecture, Round Top, TX
Abstract
Homes are important: People devote much of their thought, time, and resources to selecting, modifying, and decorating 
their living spaces, and they may be devastated when their homes must be sold or are destroyed. Yet the empirical 
psychological literature says virtually nothing about the roles that homes might play in people’s lives. We argue that 
homes provide an informative context for a wide variety of studies examining how social, developmental, cognitive, 
and other psychological processes play out in a consequential real-world setting. The topic of homes is also well 
suited to collaborations with a diverse array of disciplines ranging from architecture and engineering to sociology 
and law. We illustrate the potential insights to be gained from studying homes with an exploratory study that maps 
the psychological ambiances (e.g., romance, comfort, togetherness) that people desire in their homes; we identify 
six broad ambiance dimensions (restoration, kinship, storage, stimulation, intimacy, productivity) that show mean 
differences across rooms. We connect these findings to existing work on situation selection in emotion regulation. 
These ideas provide only an initial foray into the domain of residential space, but they hint at the productive roles that 
homes and other spaces could play in psychological theorizing and research.
Keywords
home, personal living spaces, environment, impressions, architecture, ambiance, emotion regulation

Psychology of Home Environments	
347
homes but not mere residences (Altman, 1981; Dovey, 
1985; Smith, 1994a). What might be driving these feel-
ings, and how might the desired feelings affect the physi-
cal qualities of a space?
Some architectural practitioners have speculated about 
the motives that may drive how a home’s appearance is 
shaped. Israel (2003) argued that individuals’ home envi-
ronments are reconstructions of past spaces in which 
those people felt safe and secure. According to this view, 
a person may, for example, unconsciously incorporate 
features into a space that evoke qualities from a well-
loved grandmother’s home. The motives behind these 
decisions may be propelled not by conscious tastes and 
preferences but rather by the emotional connections pro-
moted by these elements.
Gosling has proposed that manipulating one’s space can 
serve three broad functions (Gosling, Gifford, & McCunn, 
2013; Gosling, Ko, Mannarelli, & Morris, 2002). First, fea-
tures of a space can influence the activities likely to be 
performed in that space—thanks to the physical features of 
kitchens, bedrooms, living rooms, and garages, these 
spaces are particularly well suited to cooking, sleeping, 
entertaining guests, and parking, respectively. The layout 
and other physical features of the space can influence the 
activities (e.g., reading a book) or social interactions (e.g., 
chatting with friends) that take place in the space, which in 
turn may affect cognitive and emotional states of the occu-
pants (e.g., a sense of creativity or relaxation). In addition, 
ambient features (e.g., lighting levels, temperature, humid-
ity, noise, music, color, layout, shape of the space) can 
influence an occupant’s mood, concentration, and produc-
tivity (Gao et al., 2007; Gifford, 2007; Jasnoski, 1992; Küller, 
Ballal, Laike, Mikellides, & Tonello, 2006). Too much sun-
light penetration, for example, can reduce office workers’ 
levels of relaxation (Boubekri, Hull, & Boyer, 1991).
Second, the items in a space and their arrangement 
can be used to convey impressions to others; thus, for 
example, occupants can convey the importance that they 
place on family by displaying photos of their relatives or 
can communicate their political orientation via symbols 
and icons. In one study comparing the living spaces of 
politically liberal and conservative occupants in the 
United States, liberals occupied spaces with indicators of 
diverse interests in art, literature, travel, and other cul-
tures (e.g., art supplies, books, world maps, and cultural 
memorabilia brought back from vacation), whereas the 
conservative occupants tended to have decor that was 
relatively conventional (e.g., sports paraphernalia, flags 
of various types, and American flags in particular; Carney, 
Jost, Gosling, & Potter, 2008).
Third, features of the space can affect what people 
think about and how they feel when in that space; for 
example, mementos may evoke fond memories of other 
times, places, and people. The presence of personal and 
cultural artifacts (e.g., art, photos, furniture) can influence 
levels of well-being and feelings of social support (Gifford, 
2007). For instance, people may use photos of loved ones 
and other “social snacks” (tangible reminders of connec-
tions to others) to fend off feelings of loneliness and social 
isolation (Gardner, Pickett, & Knowles, 2005).
Such findings hint at the potential gains to be made 
from studying home environments. In the present article, 
we aim to draw attention to the topic of home as a poten-
tially important domain of psychological inquiry. We do 
so by sketching out some potential areas of inquiry and 
focus on one of these areas to illustrate the kinds of 
insights that can result from such work.
A Home for Empirical Research
Homes have long held great significance for individuals 
and in cultural life more broadly (Bryson, 2010; Worsley, 
2011). As a result, the topic of home has attracted atten-
tion from many disciplines across the arts and sciences, 
such as sociology, anthropology, geography, history, 
architecture, and philosophy (Mallett, 2004). In her exten-
sive review of research on the meaning and experience 
of home, Mallet noted that the concept of home has been 
variously associated with the concepts of house, family, 
haven, self, gender, and journeying (i.e., serving as a des-
tination from which or to which one travels). What is 
striking about these conceptual connections to home is 
that they are all, to varying degrees, rooted in psycho-
logical processes. For example, scholars equating home 
with the physical structure of the house have noted how 
the designs of houses can constrain and facilitate the 
social interactions and the power dynamics that are 
played out in a home. Scholars focusing on the role of 
the home as a haven draw heavily on the psychological 
states of relaxation, comfort, and a sense of security. And 
researchers who emphasize the idea of family focus on 
the role of home in providing the setting for early social 
and cognitive development.
Such links underscore the potential value of homes in 
providing the context for a wide variety of empirical 
studies within the field of psychology. In addition, the 
links point to opportunities for psychology to contribute 
to and learn from other fields. In fact, many psychology 
subdisciplines already touch on topics that are relevant to 
homes, even if they do not currently examine the topics 
directly in homes or examine their relevance to homes. 
We argue that homes are worth studying because they 
are consequential real-world settings in which basic psy-
chological processes are regularly played out. Thus, 
homes represent a context both for research within psy-
chology and for collaboration with other disciplines.

348	
Graham et al.
Potential research within psychology
Here we consider how a number of topics already stud-
ied in psychology might be enriched by contextualizing 
them within the home.
Romantic relationships.  Consider romantic relation-
ships, which are often played out in the context of homes 
but are typically studied via context-free questionnaires 
or in lab studies. To examine these relationships in con-
text, researchers could investigate the spaces in which 
couples cohabit. Research might reveal how home spaces 
reflect relationship dynamics or how home design influ-
ences interpersonal processes that, in turn, influence the 
development and longevity of romantic relationships. For 
example, how does the layout of a space interfere with 
or promote couples’ individual needs for intimacy and 
independence? And does their choice of decor reflect sta-
tus and role dynamics in the relationship? The point at 
which couples first move in together might be a particu-
larly illuminating period because newly cohabiting cou-
ples must psychologically negotiate the transition from 
living alone to sharing a space with someone else. At that 
point, does it matter to a relationship whether Person A 
moves into Person B’s home or whether they start afresh 
with a new one?
Emotion and emotion regulation.  Researchers inter-
ested in emotion and emotion regulation also often 
examine these states via decontextualized surveys or in 
lab studies. But such work needs to be augmented by 
studies of how these processes play out in the real world. 
The home serves as a useful context in which to examine 
these processes because it is a domain that is stable, yet 
malleable and in which individuals spend a great deal of 
time. Questions can be asked about topics such as how 
people use their everyday domestic social interactions 
with others to create and maintain desired emotional 
states. Do people shape their domestic spaces to facilitate 
avenues of emotional expression (e.g., by sharing gossip 
on the porch) or as a means of escape (e.g., by disap-
pearing into a “man cave” or playing in the living room 
with the kids)? How does the home facilitate the con-
sumption of other forms of emotion-regulating entertain-
ment, such as music, television, art, and literature?
Identity.  Homes also provide a consequential real-
world context in which to study processes of identity 
expression and identity development. How are home 
spaces used in the service of identity negotiation? It 
seems likely that the physical characteristics of a person’s 
space might provide a barometer of his or her ongoing 
process of identity development, especially perhaps in 
age groups occupied with the task of molding their 
identity (Erikson, 1968; McAdams, 2001). Furthermore, 
the home might provide clues to critical turning points in 
the occupants’ lives with respect to identity and develop-
ment. Thus, longitudinal and cross-sectional studies 
could reveal markers of the psychological transitions 
associated with major life changes (e.g., puberty, living 
alone for the first time, getting married, getting divorced, 
having children), such as new parents’ creation of a “toy 
room” as a space for imaginative play (Stevenson & Prout, 
2013).
Development.  Presumably children, young adults, mid-
dle-aged adults, and older individuals use, perceive, and 
relate to their home environments in different ways. 
Therefore, developmental psychologists can use homes 
as a context for examining the real-world factors that pro-
mote social and cognitive development throughout the 
life span. In the cognitive developmental domain, homes 
may provide developmental psychologists with a new 
context for observing the onset of dementia and other 
late adult cognitive disorders. Such data may be helpful 
in determining the environmental features that aid cogni-
tive development in children and promote efficient cog-
nitive function in older adults. This information could be 
useful beyond the home context, in designing schools 
and elder care facilities.
Cross-cultural psychology.  Anthropologists, histori-
ans, and sociologists have long recognized that homes 
provide an informative window through which to exam-
ine cultural differences in daily living. Cross-cultural psy-
chologists can also use the layout of and behavioral 
traces in home spaces as indicators of key cultural prac-
tices, values, and behaviors. For example, how does the 
design and decoration of spaces reflect conceptions of 
privacy and the practice of gender segregation in Qatari 
homes (Sobh & Belk, 2011)?
Previous psychological research  
on homes
Some psychologists have already recognized the unique 
insights that home environments offer, particularly in the 
context of understanding family processes, gender roles 
(Blair & Lichter, 1991; Devlin, 1994; Smith, 1994b; Starrels, 
1994), and child development (Evans, 2006). For exam-
ple, the home environment has been used to view how 
the physical layout of a space can affect daily mood and 
cortisol levels (Saxbe & Repetti, 2010) and how occu-
pants psychologically experience their homes (Molony, 
McDonald, & Palmisano-Mills, 2007). Research has also 
examined how life stressors that occur outside of the 
home (e.g., job stress) can affect behaviors within the

Psychology of Home Environments	
349
home (Ilies et al., 2007; Judge & Ilies, 2004; Repetti, 
Wang, & Saxbe, 2009; Saxbe & Repetti, 2008; Wang & 
Repetti, 2013; Wang, Repetti, & Campos, 2011) and how 
behaviors in the home (e.g., division of household labor, 
leisure time) can affect social relationships (Arnold & 
Lang, 2007; Bianchi, Milkie, Sayer, & Robinson, 2000; 
Coltrane, 2000; Klumb, Hoppmann, & Staats, 2006; Lee & 
Waite, 2005) and mental states (Judge, Ilies, & Scott, 
2006; Saxbe, Repetti, & Graesch, 2011).
Past psychological research on homes has tended to 
focus on two broad classes of environmental features. 
The first class consists of conditions inside the living 
spaces themselves. For instance, the degree to which 
homes are chaotic and crowded has been a major topic 
in research on how home environments affect the devel-
opment of children’s temperament and behaviors. 
Research suggests that, compared with children in less 
chaotic and less crowded homes, children living in cha-
otic, crowded homes tend to perform less effectively cog-
nitively and academically (Evans, Gonnella, Marcynyszyn, 
Gentile, & Salpekar, 2005; Goux & Maurin, 2005; 
Hanscombe, Haworth, Davis, Jaffee, & Plomin, 2011) and 
tend to experience more health risks and exposure to 
environmental toxins and disease (Baker, Taylor, 
Henderson, & The ALSPAC Study Team, 1998; Leventhal 
& Newman, 2010; Mann, Wadsworth, & Colley, 1992). 
Chaos and crowding in the home have also been associ-
ated with negative emotion in infants (Bridgett, Burt, 
Laake, & Oddi, 2013) and the expression of disruptive 
behaviors in children (Evans et al., 2005; Hanscombe  
et al., 2011; Jaffee, Hanscombe, Haworth, Davis, & 
Plomin, 2012).
A second class of home features refer to broader fac-
tors such as the home’s geographic location and the fre-
quency with which people move to a new home. This 
latter characteristic—known as residential mobility—has 
been tied to a broad range of outcomes, including aca-
demic performance, emotional and social issues 
(Leventhal & Newman, 2010), psychological values 
(Flouri, 2009), and early mortality (Oishi, 2010; Oishi & 
Schimmack, 2010).
Much of the past work on home environments has 
used direct-observation methods (by researchers or via 
video recordings), daily telephone interviewing, daily 
surveying, or daily diary methods (Saxbe & Repetti, 2010) 
to examine, among other things, the importance of place 
in predicting and shaping behaviors and emotions. The 
advent of new technologies (e.g., automatic sensing from 
smartphones and other devices; Miller, 2012) holds great 
promise for reduced intrusiveness and greater fidelity 
than past methods. In fact, some researchers have already 
used forms of automated assessment to explore behav-
iors that often occur in home spaces. For example, the 
electronically activated recorder has been used to 
naturalistically observe conflict that occurs within the 
home environment to complement self-report and corti-
sol data collection from children and parents (Slatcher & 
Robles, 2012).
Potential connections to other 
disciplines
Homes also provide opportunities for psychologists to 
build connections to other disciplines.
Architecture, design, and engineering.  Architecture 
is the field tasked with building the spaces in which 
humans live, so it should have a particularly strong inter-
est in learning from psychologists, the experts in human 
behavior. For example, analyses of the ways people per-
ceive and use their home environments can help archi-
tects design spaces that are suited to individuals’ real 
patterns of daily living, not just the clients’ or architects’ 
idealized versions of how home life will be played out. 
Perceptual psychologists can help architects understand 
the effects on humans of ambient features, such as sound, 
light, and odor, as they have done in institutional con-
texts, such as hospitals and office spaces (Gifford, 2007; 
Gosling et al., 2013).
Psychological knowledge of home environments can be 
used by designers, architects, and health-care professionals 
to design spaces that facilitate healthy and well-adjusted liv-
ing. Cross-disciplinary collaborations could generate archi-
tectural interventions that promote healthy lifestyle 
behaviors (e.g., eating well, exercising, engaging in good 
mental health practices). For example, health psychologists 
could examine the effects of creating easily accessible work-
out spaces in people’s homes or designing spaces to pro-
mote psychological reflection and relaxation.
More directly, engineers can incorporate psychologists’ 
knowledge of daily behaviors, attitudes, values, and per-
ceptual abilities into building designs. One team of inves-
tigators undertook a review of the changing sensory 
abilities associated with dementia and presented a series 
of modifications to the home—many of them quite 
straightforward—designed to improve the lives of people 
with this condition (van Hoof, Kort, Duijnstee, Rutten, & 
Hensen, 2010). For example, they recommend that ventila-
tion systems be developed that counter the negative effects 
of odors but that also take into account dementia patients’ 
particular susceptibility to noise-related distress.
Sociology.  Sociologists are concerned primarily with the 
effects of broad social factors such as gender, race, and 
social class on human welfare. The mechanisms through 
which these factors exert their influence are likely to be 
partly psychological and often play out in domestic con-
texts. For example, traditional gender roles are intimately

350	
Graham et al.
associated with domestic tasks undertaken in the home 
(e.g., cooking, cleaning, caring for children, fixing broken 
items, mowing the lawn).
Law.  American law gives special status and protection to 
homes. Privacy rights are extended to homes; the tax 
code gives breaks for home ownership; and when those 
protections seem to be violated, citizens can become 
upset. For example, there was a huge outcry when the 
Supreme Court approved of a city taking and razing a 
home for the purpose of economic development of a 
neighborhood (Kelo v. City of New London, 2005; Nadler 
& Diamond, 2008). A leading legal theory suggests that to 
fully enjoy the status of “personhood,” people must have 
control over some property (Barros, 2009; Blumenthal, 
2009; Radin, 1982; Stern, 2009). The purported justifica-
tions for these various protections include psychological 
ones.
Mapping Desired Psychological 
Ambiances in the Home:  
An Illustrative Study
To illustrate the potential value of research in this domain, 
we next focus on one area—exploring the landscape of 
spatial ambiances in the home. Specifically, we con-
ducted an exploratory investigation of whether there is 
any systematicity to the ambiances that individuals want 
to evoke in the physical spaces of the home and, if there 
is, what those ambiances are. This topic is instructive 
because it reveals clear connections between the psy-
chology of home and existing work in psychology (in 
this case, emotion regulation).
Some of the most basic questions regarding the psy-
chology of home focus on understanding the psychologi-
cal functions (e.g., relaxing, focusing on work, socializing) 
served by homes and the different spaces within them. 
The most relevant literature to this topic is the work on 
restorative environments, which shows that certain envi-
ronments, such as natural rather than built environment, 
can improve mood, improve focus, and relieve stress 
(Sternberg, 2009; van den Berg & Custers, 2011; van den 
Berg, Koole, & van der Wulp, 2003). But even this 
research does not focus on home spaces and devotes 
little attention to identifying the ambiances that individu-
als want to elicit. For instance, little is known about such 
basic questions as what ambiances are most commonly 
sought or whether the ambiances people want to elicit 
vary systematically across different areas of a home.
Therefore, we undertook a preliminary study to map 
out the desired psychological ambiances of a home. 
Specifically, we administered a specially designed new sur-
vey (the Inventory of Desired Ambiances in the Ideal Home 
[IDAIH]) to 200 participants via Amazon’s Mechanical 
Turk Web site (see Supplemental Material available online 
for details on the methods and instrument development). 
The IDAIH consisted of a list of 18 rooms or spaces one 
might find in a home (e.g., entryway, kitchen, living room, 
garage, backyard). We focused on “ideal homes” rather 
than individuals’ current homes for two reasons. First, the 
concept of ideal home allowed us to avoid differences 
among people in the practical and financial obstacles to 
building or choosing a space that fully realizes one’s psy-
chological goals. Second, we could ask everyone about 
the same set of rooms, rather than being constrained by 
the idiosyncratic configurations of rooms that would result 
from focusing on a large number of real spaces. Thus, our 
design was based on the supposition that people could 
meaningfully report on the ambiances they would like to 
evoke in their ideal spaces even though we understood 
that most or all of the individuals responding would not 
have had all 18 spaces in their own homes.
The instructions of the IDAIH were as follows: “As you 
enter each of the following spaces, what are the most 
important emotions or perceptions you would like to 
evoke within yourself and others?” For each of the 18 
rooms or spaces, individuals were instructed to select 
two ambiances from a list of 29 options (e.g., organiza-
tion, privacy, productivity, rejuvenation, romance, safety, 
tranquility, wealth). There was also a write-in option for 
cases where the listed states were not sufficient. For a list 
of the 29 options, see Table S1 in the Supplemental 
Material.
The most frequently selected ambiances across all 
rooms were inviting (95% of participants listed it as their 
first choice for at least one space), organization (85%), 
and relaxation (70%). The distributions of ambiances 
varied substantially across the rooms. For example, invit-
ing was listed so often because about half of all partici-
pants listed it as one of the top desired ambiances for the 
entryway (54.0%), front porch (48.5%), or guest room 
(47.0%), but it appeared much less frequently in the other 
rooms. Therefore, we next examined the frequency with 
which the ambiances were selected for each of the 18 
rooms separately.
There was generally strong consensus regarding the 
ambiances appropriate for each room. The top five ambi-
ances chosen for each room accounted for an average of 
65.8% (SD = 11.0%) of the nominations for that room; 
these findings suggest both that people do have a sense 
about which ambiances they desire in each room and that 
these ambiance and room preferences are shared by oth-
ers in the sample. As shown in Figure 1 (which organizes 
the findings in terms of a generalized blueprint plan of a 
home), the five most frequently selected ambiances varied 
across rooms, and some rooms elicited greater consensus 
among participants than did other rooms. For example, 
as noted earlier, there was strong consensus among

Psychology of Home Environments	
351
participants regarding which ambiances were most desired 
in the ideal entryway, with half the participants (54.0%) 
choosing inviting as their first choice. After inviting, there 
was a sharp drop-off for the next most popular ambiances 
of sophistication (5.0%), family (5.0%), quiet (4.5%), and 
cozy (3.5%). This strong preference for one ambiance 
matches the predominant practical function of entryways 
(i.e., entering the home). Conversely, the kitchen was 
characterized by less consensus, with the top five ambi-
ances distributed more evenly, with organization (17.5%) 
being the most popular, followed by family (12.5%), pro-
ductivity (11.0%), abundance (11.0%), and togetherness 
(8.5%). This variety of desired ambiances reflects the var-
ied practical and social functions that kitchens tend to 
serve. This pattern also hints at individual differences that 
may be responsible for this variation. For example, extro-
verts may desire spaces conducive to interacting with oth-
ers (e.g., spaces evoking a sense of family), whereas those 
high on conscientiousness may desire spaces that promote 
a sense of organization.
To determine whether the 29 ambiances of the IDAIH 
reflected a broader underlying structure of residential-
environmental preferences, we subjected participants’ 
ratings to a principal components analysis (PCA), exam-
ining the preferences across rooms (see Supplemental 
Material for details of procedures used to determine the 
dimensions and the full content of the dimensions). A 
six-factor solution was retained, accounting for 72.3% of 
the variance. We labeled the factors Restoration, Kinship, 
Storage, Stimulation, Intimacy, and Productivity (see Fig. 
1 and Supplemental Material; the factors are listed in the 
order in which they emerged in the PCA).
As a whole, the results demonstrate that individuals 
desire a broad range of specific ambiances in their ideal 
living spaces. On average, each participant selected 16.0 
(SD = 3.2) of the 29 different ambiances for their ideal 
homes. The ambiances also differed systematically across 
spaces. For example, many participants wanted a roman-
tic bedroom, but none of them wanted a romantic garage. 
These links between ambiances and environments point 
to the idea that, in addition to having various physical 
qualities that help or hinder pragmatic tasks, spaces also 
have psychological qualities that almost certainly affect 
how the spaces are used, how the occupants feel, and 
what they think about.
Of course, this preliminary study provides only a first 
glimpse into the psychological ambiances people would 
like to create in their ideal homes. Naturally, such survey-
based findings about ideal spaces need to be followed up 
with studies of what people really do to their own spaces 
or whether their responses instead reflect naive theories 
about themselves and others. Questions are also raised 
about the extent to which the ambiances are directed to 
the occupants themselves versus visitors; for example, 
one might expect other-directed ambiances in the more 
public spaces and self-directed ambiances in the more 
private spaces (Gosling et al., 2002). And how are ambi-
ances affected by such factors as income, gender, culture, 
age, and class, whether the space is owned or rented, or 
whether the occupants are living alone or with others?
Despite these unanswered questions, the findings do 
make two important contributions. First, they serve as a 
springboard for beginning to understand how psycho-
logical processes may be played out in the home. Second, 
and more broadly, with little existing empirical work in 
this domain, the present work illustrates the richness of 
home environments as a venue for psychological 
research, with implications that extend to other spatial 
units. In the remaining sections of this article, we expand 
on these two contributions.
Connecting home psychology to the 
broader field
Broadly speaking, there are two main ways to change 
one’s environment. First, changes can be brought about by 
manipulating features of the space itself, sometimes tem-
porarily (e.g., playing some soothing music) and some-
times more permanently (e.g., changing the flooring in 
one’s living room). Second, changes can be brought about 
by moving to a new environment with preexisting features 
likely to facilitate a desired state; again, sometimes these 
actions are temporary (e.g., going to the beach to relax), 
and sometimes they are more permanent (e.g., moving to 
a neighborhood with similarly minded occupants; Bishop, 
2009; Florida, 2008; McPherson, Smith-Lovin, & Cook, 
2001; Motyl, Iyer, Oishi, Trawalter, & Nosek, 2014). It is 
important to recognize that psychological processes 
underlie these forms of manipulation and selection (Buss, 
1987; Rentfrow, Gosling, & Potter, 2008). Specifically, per-
sonality (e.g., traits, values) and other individual differ-
ences (e.g., age, gender, health) dictate psychological and 
physical parameters that are better suited to some spaces 
than to others; thus, extroverts are better suited than intro-
verts are to places that facilitate lively socializing. In spaces 
like the kitchen, where a varied (but limited) set of ambi-
ances were desired, different people may use the same 
space to meet different needs.
The current data do not permit analyses of which vari-
ables determine whether a person would prefer to evoke 
a sense of, say, abundance rather than togetherness in 
their kitchen. However, existing theories provide some 
guidance regarding which variables are likely to be rele-
vant to the choices individuals make as they manipulate 
and select their physical spaces. Interactionist approaches 
in environmental and personality research emphasize the 
role of individuals in selecting, manipulating, and evok-
ing situations and environments to match their personali-
ties, goals, attitudes, and values (Buss, 1987). The 
emotion-regulation literature posits similar kinds of

352	
Family 
Privacy 
Master
Bedroom
Master Bath
Study
Game Room
Entryway
Guest Bath
Guest Room
Kitchen
Living Room
Dining Room
Pantry 
Inviting 
Sophistication 
Quiet 
Cozy 
Organization 
Abundance 
Togetherness 
Productivity 
Quiet 
Organization 
Family 
Abundance 
Productivity 
Togetherness 
Togetherness 
Cozy 
Comfort 
Relaxation 
Family 
Togetherness 
Family 
Relaxation 
Entertaining 
Sophistication 
Privacy 
Rejuvenation 
Quiet 
Inviting 
Joyousness 
Excitement  
Fun 
Entertaining 
Family 
Romance 
Relaxation 
Love 
Privacy 
Privacy 
Rejuvenation 
Relaxation 
Quiet OR Romance OR Tranquilityc
Organization 
Creativity OR Self-expressivee
Quiet 
Inviting 
Comfort 
Friendship 
Cozy 
Relaxation 
Front
Porch
Media Room
Garage
Backyard
Master Closet
Sitting Room
Organization 
Abundance 
Sophistication 
Privacy 
Self- expressive 
Abundance 
Relaxation 
Family 
Fun 
Community 
Inviting 
Quiet 
Relaxation 
Tranquility 
Rejuvenation OR
Uniquenessa
Quiet 
Relaxation 
Cozy 
Entertaining 
Comfort 
Organization 
Productivity 
Safety 
Quiet 
Creativity OR Togetherness
OR  Uniquenessf
Entertaining 
Family 
Fun 
Togetherness 
Relaxation OR
Sophisticationd
Organization 
Productivity 
Abundance 
Safety 
Self-expressive OR Wealth OR Excitementb
Productivity 
Relaxation 
Comfort 
Utility
Room
Legend
Productivity
Quiet
Self-expressive
PRODUCTIVITY 
Comfort
Love
Romance
INTIMACY 
Entertaining
Excitement
Fun
STIMULATION 
Abundance
Friendship(R)
Organization
Inviting(R)
Cozy(R)
Safety
STORAGE 
Community
Family
Sophistication
Togetherness
KINSHIP 
Privacy
Rejuvenation
Tranquility
Relaxation
RESTORATION 
(R) = Items loading negatively on the factor 
More than 1 ambiance
Not included in PCA
Others (beyond the Top 5)
Fig. 1.  Example blueprint plan depicting top five ambiances desired in each room or space of the home. Each pie chart depicts the five most frequently selected ambiances in each 
room. In six cases (i.e., front porch, garage, master bath, media room, study, and utility room), more than one ambiance tied for fourth or fifth most frequently selected ambiance; 
these cases are shaded light gray. Note that each gray slice represents not the composite of those tied ambiances but rather the percentage of one of each of the ambiances. aRejuvena-
tion and uniqueness were tied as the fifth most frequently selected ambiance. bExcitement, self-expressive, and wealth were tied as the fifth most frequently selected ambiance. cQuiet, 
romance, and tranquility were tied as the fourth most frequently selected ambiance. dRelaxation and sophistication were tied as the fifth most frequently selected ambiance. eCreativity 
and self-expressive were tied as the fifth most frequently selected ambiance. fCreativity, togetherness, and uniqueness were tied as the fifth most frequently selected ambiance. Table 
S2 in the Supplemental Material presents the data on which this figure is based. Factors are listed in the order in which they emerged from the principal components analysis (PCA), 
but the items are listed alphabetically within each factor.

Psychology of Home Environments	
353
processes in which individuals are thought to select and 
modify their situations to initiate, avoid, maintain, reduce, 
or enhance core emotional states (e.g., Gross, 1998; 
Gross & Thompson, 2007; Koole, 2009).
Despite these clear parallels between interactionist 
perspectives in environmental psychology and theories 
of emotion regulation, the topic of physical space has 
been largely ignored in contemporary research on emo-
tion and emotion regulation. The Handbook of Emotion 
Regulation (Gross, 2007) has no chapter on the topic, 
and the terms space, environment, and ambiance are not 
even listed in the index. A keyword search in PsycINFO 
of the journals Emotion, Cognition and Emotion, Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, and Personality and Social 
Psychology Review for articles that combined “emotion 
regulation” (or “emotional regulation”) with either “ambi-
ance,” “space,” “environment,” “design,” “decorate,” or 
“decoration” yielded zero articles. Even combining these 
environmental terms with the much broader keyword of 
“emotion” yielded only four articles, none of which 
focused on how physical spaces affect emotions.
Yet the present work supports the idea that physical 
spaces may be a particularly pervasive and powerful 
mechanism for regulating emotions because spaces are 
flexible and stable. Spaces are flexible in the sense that 
one can do a lot of different things to one’s space in terms 
of the way it is organized, decorated, and furnished with 
objects. As a result, emotional regulation in spaces may 
operate through visual (e.g., via items of decor), auditory 
(e.g., via music played on the stereo), tactile (e.g., via the 
materials used in furniture), olfactory (e.g., via fragrances 
emitted by candles), ambient (e.g., via the temperature 
and humidity), and social (e.g., by arranging a space to 
induce social interactions) channels. With so many chan-
nels and so many options in each channel, the items 
designed to regulate emotions can be finely tuned to 
evoke a varied palette of ambiances, such as those illus-
trated in our study. At the same time, elements of physical 
space are also relatively stable. As a result, spaces can 
exert a persistent and predictable effect on emotions, 
again making spaces a potentially powerful and precise 
form of emotion regulation. Therefore, homes provide an 
excellent domain in which to examine emotion-regulation 
processes because only a limited number of individuals 
occupy the spaces, the environments are quite stable, and 
occupants spend a great deal of time in them.
Stepping outside the home: A broader 
psychology of physical spaces
The present work examined just one level of spatial scale 
(i.e., the rooms of a home). It is likely that the mecha-
nisms discussed here also operate at both smaller and 
larger scales. Even within a single room, different parts of 
the space will be experienced differently. Standing by the 
edge of the room looking through the window is likely 
to have different effects on thoughts and emotions than 
sitting on the sofa in full view of the art on the walls and 
mementos above the fireplace. At a broader scale, physi-
cal situation selection can be expressed in terms of the 
type of venue one visits (e.g., a bar versus a café or a café 
chain versus an independent café) and the type of neigh-
borhood, city, or region in which one resides (Bishop, 
2009; Florida, 2008; Motyl et al., 2014; Rentfrow et al., 
2008). Recent theoretical and empirical work taking a 
socioecological perspective emphasizes precisely this 
mutual dynamic interplay between individuals and the 
social, cultural, and physical contexts they inhabit 
(Gebauer et al., 2014; Oishi & Graham, 2010).
In addition to the theoretical questions raised by 
examining the relationships individuals have with their 
environments, the findings potentially offer insights into 
how these ideas could be applied in “real-world” settings. 
Essentially, when architects and designers design a build-
ing, they are aiming to facilitate a particular function, 
which usually has a psychological component to it. For 
example, the purpose of a hospital room is to facilitate 
healing, so it may help for that space to promote feelings 
of restoration, regeneration, rejuvenation, and health; at 
the same time, the space must be designed to allow the 
people who work there to do their jobs efficiently. 
Therefore, a fuller understanding of how physical fea-
tures influence the psychological states experienced in a 
space and the activities that occur within the space can 
inform how spaces are designed to help achieve a desired 
outcome. This knowledge could be applied to all kinds 
of spaces ranging from broad institutions, such as hospi-
tals and universities, to more personal spaces like homes 
and offices.
The current study provides just one illustration of the 
psychological richness of home environments. It shows 
how empirical research on homes can inform existing 
theories in psychology and other fields concerned with 
human behavior and the built environment. In doing so, 
we hope that the present article will serve as an impetus 
for researchers to explore the processes underlying the 
psychology of home and the other spaces that provide 
the physical contexts for human activity.
Acknowledgments
We thank Mario Alvarado, Erica Baranski, Nikki Brown, Parker 
Crouch, Lanie Crow, Justine Curry, Catherine Faig, Mareike 
Janiak, Karl Jun, Kelly Lee, Mary Mason, Michael Mathieu, 
Constance Seré, and Ashley Vivlamore for their help with col-
lection of these data. We also thank Oliver John, Jennifer Beer, 
Jason Farrell, and Jamie Fratkin for their helpful comments dur-
ing the writing of this article.

354	
Graham et al.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared that they had no conflicts of interest with 
respect to their authorship or the publication of this article.
Supplemental Material
Additional supporting information may be found at http://pps 
.sagepub.com/content/by/supplemental-data
References
Altman, I. (1981). The environment and social behavior. 
Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Arnold, J. E., & Lang, U. (2007). The changing landscape of 
home: Trends in home-based leisure and storage among 
working American families. Journal of Family and 
Economic Issues, 28, 23–48.
Baker, D., Taylor, H., Henderson, J., & The ALSPAC Study Team. 
(1998). Inequality in infant morbidity: Causes and conse-
quences in England in the 1990s. Journal of Epidemiology 
& Community Health, 52, 451–458.
Barros, D. B. (2009). Legal questions for the psychology of 
home. Tulane Law Review, 83, 645–660.
Bianchi, S. M., Milkie, M. A., Sayer, L. C., & Robinson, J. P. 
(2000). Is anyone doing the housework? Trends in the gen-
der division of household labor. Social Forces, 79, 191–228.
Bishop, B. (2009). The big sort: Why the clustering of like-minded 
America is tearing us apart. Boston, MA: Mariner Books.
Blair, S. L., & Lichter, D. T. (1991). Measuring the division of 
household labor: Gender segregation of housework among 
American couples. Journal of Family Issues, 12, 91–113.
Blumenthal, J. A. (2009). “To be human”: A psychological per-
spective on property law. Tulane Law Review, 83, 609–644.
Bosari, J. (2012, October 24). Growth of the home décor 
market shows no signs of slowing down. Forbes. 
Retrieved from http://www.forbes.com/sites/moneywise-
women/2012/10/24/growth-of-the-home-decor-market-
shows-no-signs-of-slowing-down/
Boubekri, M., Hull, R. B., & Boyer, L. L. (1991). Impact of 
window size and sunlight penetration on office workers’ 
mood and satisfaction: A novel way of assessing sunlight. 
Environment & Behavior, 23, 474–493.
Bridgett, D. J., Burt, N. M., Laake, L. M., & Oddi, K. B. (2013). 
Maternal self-regulation, relationship adjustment, and 
chaos: Contributions to infant negative emotionality. Infant 
Behavior & Development, 36, 534–547.
Bryson, B. (2010). At home: A short history of private life. New 
York, NY: Anchor Books.
Buss, D. M. (1987). Selection, evocation, and manipulation. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 1214–
1221.
Carney, D. R., Jost, J. T., Gosling, S. D., & Potter, J. (2008). The 
secret lives of liberals and conservatives: Personality pro-
files, interaction styles, and the things they leave behind. 
Political Psychology, 29, 807–840.
Coltrane, S. (2000). Research on household labor: Modeling 
and measuring the social embeddedness of routine family 
work. Journal of Marriage and Family, 62, 1208–1233.
Cooper-Marcus, C. (1995). House as a mirror of self: Exploring 
the deeper meaning of home. Berkeley, CA: Conari Press.
Devlin, A. S. (1994). Gender roles and housing preferences. 
Journal of Environmental Psychology, 14, 225–235.
Dovey, K. (1985). Home and homelessness. In I. Altman &  
C. Werner (Eds.), Home environments (pp. 33–64). New 
York, NY: Plenum Press.
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York, NY: 
W. W. Norton.
Evans, G. W. (2006). Child development and the physical envi-
ronment. Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 423–451.
Evans, G. W., Gonnella, C., Marcynyszyn, L. A., Gentile, L., & 
Salpekar, N. (2005). The role of chaos in poverty socioemo-
tional adjustment. Psychological Science, 16, 560–565.
Florida, R. (2008). Who’s your city? New York, NY: Basic Books.
Flouri, E. (2009). Strong families, tidy homes, and children’s val-
ues in adult life: Are “chaotic,” “crowded,” and “unstable” 
homes really so bad? Journal of Behavioral Development, 
33, 496–503.
Gao, X., Xin, J. H., Sato, T., Hansuebsai, A., Scalzo, M., Kajiwara, 
K., . . . Billger, M. (2007). Analysis of cross-cultural color 
emotion. Color Research and Application, 32, 223–229.
Gardner, W. L., Pickett, C. L., & Knowles, M. (2005). Social 
snacking and shielding: Using social symbols, selves, and 
surrogates in the service of belonging needs. In K. D. 
Williams, J. P. Forgas, & W. von Hippel (Eds.), The social 
outcast: Ostracism, social exclusion, rejection, and bullying 
(pp. 227–241). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Gebauer, J. E., Bleidorn, W., Gosling, S. D., Rentfrow, P. J., 
Lamb, M. E., & Potter, J. (2014). Cross-cultural variations in 
Big Five relations with religiosity: A socio-cultural motives 
perspective. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
107, 1064–1091.
Gifford, R. (2007). Environmental psychology: Principles and 
practice (4th ed.). Colville, WA: Optimal Books.
Gosling, S. D., Gifford, R., & McCunn, L. (2013). The selection, 
creation, and perception of interior spaces: An environ-
mental psychology approach. In G. Brooker & L. Weinthal 
(Eds.), The handbook of interior design (pp. 278–290). 
Oxford, England: Berg.
Gosling, S. D., Ko, S. J., Mannarelli, T., & Morris, M. E. (2002). 
A room with a cue: Judgments of personality based on 
offices and bedrooms. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 82, 379–398.
Goux, D., & Maurin, E. (2005). The effect of overcrowded hous-
ing on children’s performance at school. Journal of Public 
Economics, 89, 797–819.
Gross, J. J. (1998). The emerging field of emotion regulation: 
An integrative review. Review of General Psychology, 2, 
271–299.
Gross, J. J. (2007). Handbook of emotion regulation. New York, 
NY: Guilford Press.
Gross, J. J., & Thompson, R. A. (2007). Emotion regulation: 
Conceptual foundations. In J. J. Gross (Ed.), Handbook of 
emotion regulation (pp. 3–24). New York, NY: Guilford 
Press.
Hanscombe, K. B., Haworth, C. M. A., Davis, O. S. P., Jaffee,  
S. R., & Plomin, R. (2011). Chaotic homes and school

Psychology of Home Environments	
355
achievement: A twin study. Journal of Child Psychology 
and Psychiatry, 52, 1212–1220.
Hayward, D. G. (1975). Home as an environmental and psycho-
logical concept. Landscape, 20, 2–9.
HGTV. (2013, December 6). Viewership statistics. Retrieved 
from http://www.hgtvadsales.com/AboutUs/research.pdf
Ilies, R., Schwind, K. M., Wagner, D. T., Johnson, M. D., DeRue, 
D. S., & Ilgen, D. R. (2007). When can employees have a 
family life?: The effects of daily workload and affect on 
work-family conflict and social behaviors at home. Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 92, 1368–1379.
Israel, T. (2003). Some place like home: Using design psychology 
to create ideal places. New York, NY: Wiley-Academy.
Jaffee, S. R., Hanscombe, K. B., Haworth, C. M. A., Davis,  
O. S. P., & Plomin, R. (2012). Chaotic homes and children’s 
disruptive behavior: A longitudinal cross-lagged twin study. 
Psychological Science, 23, 643–650.
Jasnoski, M. B. (1992). The physical environment affects qual-
ity of life based upon environmental sensitivity. Journal of 
Applied Developmental Psychology, 13, 139–142.
Judge, T. A., & Ilies, R. (2004). Affect and job satisfaction: A 
study of their relationship at work and at home. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 89, 661–673.
Judge, T. A., Ilies, R., & Scott, B. (2006). Work-family conflict 
and emotions: Effects at work and at home. Personnel 
Psychology, 59, 779–814.
Jung, C. G. (1963). Memories, dreams, reflections. New York, 
NY: Vintage Books.
Kelo v. City of New London, 545 U.S. 469 (2005).
Klumb, P., Hoppmann, C., & Staats, M. (2006). Division of labor 
in German dual-earner families: Testing equity theoretical 
hypotheses. Journal of Marriage and Family, 68, 870–882.
Koole, S. L. (2009). The psychology of emotion regulation: An 
integrative review. Cognition & Emotion, 23, 4–41.
Küller, R., Ballal, S., Laike, T., Mikellides, B., & Tonello, G. 
(2006). The impact of light and colour on psychological 
mood: A cross-cultural study of indoor work environments. 
Ergonomics, 49, 1496–1507.
Lee, Y.-S., & Waite, L. J. (2005). Husbands’ and wives’ time 
spent on housework: A comparison of measures. Journal 
of Marriage and Family, 67, 328–336.
Leventhal, T., & Newman, S. (2010). Housing and child develop-
ment. Children and Youth Services Review, 32, 1165–1174.
Mallett, S. (2004). Understanding home: A critical review of the 
literature. Sociological Review, 52, 62–89.
Mann, S. L., Wadsworth, M. E., & Colley, J. R. (1992). 
Accumulation of factors influencing respiratory illness in 
members of a national birth cohort and their offspring. 
Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health, 46, 286–292.
McAdams, D. P. (2001). The psychology of life stories. Review 
of General Psychology, 5, 100–122.
McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., & Cook, J. M. (2001). Birds of 
a feather: Homophily in social networks. Annual Review of 
Sociology, 27, 415–444.
Miller, G. (2012). The smartphone psychology manifesto. 
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7, 221–237.
Molony, S. L., McDonald, D. D., & Palmisano-Mills, C. (2007). 
Psychometric testing of an instrument to measure the expe-
rience of home. Research in Nursing & Health, 30, 518–530.
Motyl, M., Iyer, R., Oishi, S., Trawalter, S., & Nosek, B. A. (2014). 
How moral migration geographically segregates and polarizes 
groups. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 51, 1–14.
Nadler, J., & Diamond, S. S. (2008). Eminent domain and the 
psychology of property rights: Proposed use, subjective 
attachment, and taker identity. Journal of Empirical Legal 
Studies, 5, 713–749.
Oishi, S. (2010). The psychology of residential mobility: 
Implications for the self, social relationships, and well-
being. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5, 5–21.
Oishi, S., & Graham, J. (2010). Social ecology: The lost and found 
in psychological sciences. Perspectives on Psychological 
Science, 5, 365–377.
Oishi, S., & Schimmack, U. (2010). Residential mobility, well-
being, and mortality. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 98, 980–994.
Radin, M. J. (1982). Property and personhood. Stanford Law 
Review, 34, 957–1016.
Rentfrow, P. J., Gosling, S. D., & Potter, J. (2008). The geogra-
phy of personality: A theory of emergence, persistence, and 
exploration of regional variation in basic traits. Perspectives 
on Psychological Science, 3, 339–369.
Repetti, R. L., Wang, S., & Saxbe, D. (2009). Bringing it all 
back home: How outside stressors shape families’ every-
day lives. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 18, 
106–111.
Saxbe, D. E., & Repetti, R. L. (2008). Taking the temperature 
of family life: Preliminary results from an observational 
study. In A. Newhall-Marcus, D. Halpern, & S. Tan (Eds.), 
Changing realities of work and family (pp. 175–193). New 
York, NY: Wiley-Blackwell.
Saxbe, D. E., & Repetti, R. L. (2010). No place like home: Home 
tours correlate with daily patterns of mood and cortisol. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36, 71–81.
Saxbe, D. E., Repetti, R. L., & Graesch, A. P. (2011). Time spent 
in housework and leisure: Links with parent’s physiologi-
cal recovery from work. Journal of Family Psychology, 25, 
271–281.
Slatcher, R. B., & Robles, T. F. (2012). Preschoolers’ conflict at 
home and diurnal cortisol patterns. Health Psychology, 31, 
834–838.
Smith, S. G. (1994a). The essential qualities of a home. Journal 
of Environmental Psychology, 14, 21–30.
Smith, S. G. (1994b). The psychological construction of home 
life. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 14, 125–136.
Sobh, R., & Belk, R. W. (2011). Privacy and gendered spaces in 
Arab Gulf homes. Home Cultures, 8, 317–340.
Starrels, M. E. (1994). Husbands’ involvement in female gender-
typed household chores. Sex Roles, 31, 473–491.
Stern, S. M. (2009). Residential protectionism and the legal 
mythology of home. Michigan Law Review, 107, 1093–
1144.
Sternberg, E. M. (2009). Healing spaces: The science of place 
and well-being. Boston, MA: Belknap Press.
Stevenson, O., & Prout, A. (2013). Space for play? Families’ 
strategies for organizing domestic space in homes with 
young children. Home Cultures, 10, 135–157.
van den Berg, A. E., & Custers, M. G. (2011). Gardening pro-
motes neuroendocrine and affective restoration from

356	
Graham et al.
stress. Journal of Health Psychology, 16, 3–11. doi:10.1177/ 
1359105310365577
van den Berg, A. E., Koole, S. L., & van der Wulp, N. Y. (2003). 
Environment preference and restoration: (How) are they 
related? Journal of Environmental Psychology, 23, 135–146. 
doi:10.1016/S0272-4944(02)00111-1
van Hoof, J., Kort, H. S. M., Duijnstee, M. S. H., Rutten, P. G. S., 
& Hensen, J. L. M. (2010). The indoor environment and the 
integrated design of homes for older people with dementia. 
Building and Environment, 45, 1244–1261.
Wang, S., & Repetti, R. L. (2013). After the workday ends: How 
jobs impact family relationships. In A. L. Vangelisti (Ed.), 
Handbook of family communication (2nd ed., pp. 409–
423). New York, NY: Routledge.
Wang, S., Repetti, R. L., & Campos, B. (2011). Job stress and 
family social behavior: The moderating role of neuroti-
cism. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 16, 
441–456.
Worsley, L. (2011). If walls could talk: An intimate history of the 
home. New York, NY: Walker and Company.