Spaces of Belonging

General Editors:
Robert Burden (University of Teesside)
Stephan Kohl (Universität Würzburg)
Editorial Board: 
Christine Berberich 
Christoph Ehland 
Catrin Gersdorf 
Jan Hewitt 
Ralph Pordzik 
Chris Thurgar-Dawson 
Merle Tönnies 
Spatial Practices
An Interdisciplinary Series in 
Cultural History,
Geography and
Literature
3

Amsterdam - New York, NY 2007
Spaces of Belonging
Home, Culture and Identity in 
20th Century French Autobiography
Elizabeth H. Jones

Cover Design: Pier Post
The paper on which this book is printed meets the requirements of “ISO 
9706:1994, Information and documentation - Paper for documents - 
Requirements for permanence”.
ISSN: 1871-689X
ISBN: 978-90-420-2283-6
©Editions Rodopi B.V., Amsterdam - New York, NY 2007
Printed in the Netherlands
Cover painting: Charlie Baird, Doorway, www.charliebaird.co.uk

The Spatial Practices Series 
 
 
The series Spatial Practices belongs to the topographical 
turn in cultural studies and aims to publish new work in 
the study of spaces and places which have been appropri-
ated for cultural meanings: symbolic landscapes and ur-
ban places which have specific cultural meanings that 
construct, maintain, and circulate myths of a unified na-
tional or regional culture and their histories, or whose 
visible ironies deconstruct those myths. Taking up the 
lessons of the new cultural geography, papers are invited 
which attempt to build bridges between the disciplines of 
cultural history, literary and cultural studies, and geogra-
phy. 
Spatial Practices aims to promote a new interdis-
ciplinary kind of cultural history drawing on constructiv-
ist approaches to questions of culture and identity that 
insist that cultural “realities” are the effect of discourses, 
but also that cultural objects and their histories and geog-
raphies are read as texts, with formal and generic rules, 
tropes and topographies. 
 
Robert Burden 
Stephan Kohl

CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
17 
Chapter 1: Space and Literature 
23 
1.0 Postmodernism and Space: A Critical Framework 
30 
The Postmodern: A Contested Field 
30 
The Postmodern: Key Characteristics 
35 
Postmodern Space 
40 
Home Space and Cultural Belonging in the Postmodern 
World 
 
53 
Representation and Space: Mapping the Postmodern 
60 
1.1 Interdisciplinarity: The Space Between Geography and 
Literature 
 
70 
1.2 Geography and Literature: The Theoretical Space of This 
Project 
 
83 
Chapter 2: Contemporary Life Writing 
87 
2.1 Autobiography and Autofiction 
90 
2.2 Serge Doubrovsky 
99 
Doubrovsky’s Literary Motivations and Beliefs 
100 
Doubrovsky’s Autofictional Corpus 
106 
2.3 Hervé Guibert 
111 
Guibert’s Literary Motivations and Beliefs 
112 
Guibert’s Life Writing: Corpus and Generic Status 
118 
2.4 Régine Robin 
124 
Régine Robin’s Personal and Intellectual Background 
124 
Robin’s Literary Corpus and Generic Status 
130 
2.5 Life Writing: The Space of This Project 
140

Chapter 3: Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s 
AIDS texts 
 
143 
3.0 Introduction: Cultural Production; Cultural Turmoil; 
Spatial Myths. 
 
143 
3.1 Spaces of Cultural Belonging and Home: Paris; Rome and 
Elba 
 
146 
3.2 The Spaces of AIDS: Body and Space 
150 
3.3 Spatial Leitmotifs 
158 
Confinement: the Medical, the Concentration Camp and 
the Cellar 
 
158 
Resistance 
164 
Escape: Abjection from or Rejection of Paris 
171 
3.4 World View 
173 
Chapter 4: Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of 
Self and Place 
 
181 
4.1 An Unsettled Sense of Belonging in a Stable World 
184 
Family Roots 
187 
Ideological Context 
190 
From Cultural Dispossession to Spatial Displacement 
194 
4.2 Liberation and Confinement: An Inescapable Dialectic 
201 
4.3 Divided Identity in Divided Spaces 
206 
Lacanian Geographies and Divisions 
208 
Chapter 5: Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and  
Moving Home Spaces 
 
219 
5.1 Lost Home Space 
224 
5.2 Urban Spaces of Belonging: Paris and Montreal 
227 
Paris 
228 
Montreal 
234 
5.3 Houses 
244 
5.4 Travelling Identities/Dwelling in Travel 
247

Chapter 6: Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
253 
6.1 Autofiction and Postmodernism 
256 
6.2 Doubrovsky and Postmodernism 
264 
‘Doubrovsky’: A Postmodern Subject Moving through 
Postmodern Spaces 
 
264 
Doubrovsky’s Autofictions as Postmodern Cartography? 
269 
6.3 Robin and Postmodernism 
272 
Robin: Plural Identities and Heterogeneous Spaces 
272 
Robin’s Life Writing as Postmodern Cartography? 
277 
6.4 Guibert and Postmodernism 
281 
‘Guibert’: Labyrinthine, Monstrous and Dysfunctional 
Space 
 
281 
Guibert’s Autofictions as Postmodern Cartography? 
285 
Conclusion 
291 
Bibliography 
297 
Index 
311

Acknowledgements 
 
 
This book is derived from a PhD thesis completed at the University of 
Birmingham in 2003. I wish to thank my PhD Supervisor, Professor 
Alex Hughes, for her constant support and guidance in the production 
of this work. Her role in inspiring me to undertake this research and 
then acting as mentor throughout my doctoral study was invaluable. I 
would also like to thank Professor Charles Forsdick, for the close 
reading of my work that he undertook whilst acting as external 
examiner, and the support and encouragement that he subsequently 
gave me in getting it published. Dr Martyn Cornick’s role as PhD 
examiner was much appreciated. Professor Jennifer Birkett was of 
great assistance to me, particularly in the early stages of the project, 
both in terms of providing general advice and in helping me to secure 
funding to carry out the work. 
The doctoral study with which this book began was made 
possible by an AHRB studentship, and its transformation into a book 
was greatly aided by a brief period of ‘Special Additional Study 
Leave’ granted by the University of Leicester in Winter 2006. 
Prof. Dr. Stephan Kohl, Elke Demant, Yvonne Humm and 
Angelika Schreiber, all at Würzburg, have proved a calm and efficient 
editorial team to work with – thank you. 
Finally, but not least, I would like to thank those who supported 
me in a personal way throughout the demanding process of producing 
this work. My family were a constant source of reassurance and 
encouragement, and in my brother’s case, subject-specific advice. 
Most of all, Jim’s unfailing sanity, common sense and good humour 
were  invaluable.

List of Abbreviated Names of Primary Texts* 
 
 
Serge Doubrovsky 
 
F 
Fils 
UAS 
Un amour de soi 
LLB 
Le Livre brisé 
AV 
L’Après-Vivre 
LPC 
Laissé pour conte 
 
 
Hervé Guibert 
 
ALA 
A l’ami qui ne m’a pas sauvé la vie 
Le PC Le Protocole compassionnel 
HCR 
L’Homme au chapeau rouge 
C 
Cytomégalovirus 
Le P 
Le Paradis 
 
 
Régine Robin 
 
Q 
La Québécoite 
IFP 
L’Immense Fatigue des pierres 
PP 
Papiers perdus 
 
 
 
* For full details of these texts please see bibliography

Abstract: Questions of space, place and identity have become increas-
ingly prominent throughout the arts and humanities in recent times. 
This study begins by investigating the reasons for this growth in inter-
est and analyses the underlying assumptions on which interdiscipli-
nary discussions about space are often based. After tracing back the 
history of contact between Geography and Literary Studies from both 
disciplinary perspectives, it goes on to discuss recent academic work 
in the field and seeks to forge a new conceptual framework through 
which contemporary discussions of space and literature can operate. 
The book then moves on to a thorough application of the inter-
disciplinary model that it has established. Having argued that the ex-
perience of contemporary space has rendered questions of home and 
belonging particularly pressing, it undertakes detailed analysis of how 
these phenomena are articulated in a selection of recent French life 
writing texts. The close, text-led readings reveal that whilst not often 
highlighted for their relevance to the analysis of space, these works do 
in fact narrate the impact of some of the most significant cultural ex-
periences of the twentieth century, including the Holocaust and the 
AIDS crisis, upon geo-cultural senses of identity. Home is shown to 
be a deeply problematic, yet strongly desired, element of the contem-
porary world. 
The book concludes by addressing the underlying thesis that 
contemporary life writing might provide just the ‘postmodern maps’ 
that could help not only literary scholars, but also geographers, better 
understand the world today. 
 
Key names and concepts: Serge Doubrovsky - Hervé Guibert - Fredric 
Jameson - Philippe Lejeune - Régine Robin; Autofiction - Cultural 
Geography - Interdisciplinarity - Place and Identity - Postmodernism - 
Space - Postmodern Space - Literary Studies - Twentieth-Century Life 
Writing.

Introduction 
 
 
In his 1989 monograph entitled Maps of Meaning, Peter Jackson 
(1989: 1) argues that ‘cultures are maps of meaning through which the 
world is made intelligible’. Whilst the reference to space in this 
assertion appears to be merely metaphorical, Jackson (1989:3) goes on 
to emphasise the crucial role that space plays in the constitution of 
cultures. In fact, in recent decades there has been growing recognition 
of the important role played by space not only within the formation of 
cultures but within all aspects of our experience of the world. Within 
academia, recognition of the potential contribution to be made by 
space in deepening our understanding of contemporary life has 
spawned a proliferation of studies. The common thread uniting these 
diffuse works is a general consensus that the resurgence of interest in 
space that has occurred since the 1960s can be attributed not merely to 
changes in critical understandings of space, but to changes in the very 
nature and experience of space itself. Developments in transport and 
telecommunications technologies, for example, have brought spaces 
‘closer together’, facilitating movement and blurring the boundaries 
between spaces. The impact of the resultant cultural contact and 
cultural dislocation upon both individual identities and societies 
cannot be overstated. Moreover, in theoretical terms, whereas space 
used to be commonly understood to be a ‘dead’ or ‘passive’ arena in 
which events merely take place, its active, constitutive potential has 
increasingly been realised.1 Spaces are not merely empty stages upon 
which people act out their lives, but are deeply imbued with cultural 
meanings as well as entwined in the power relations around which 
societies revolve. At the level of both lived experience and critical 
analysis, then, understanding space seems to be an increasingly urgent 
prerequisite for any attempt to understand the contemporary world. 
                                                 
1 
See Keith and Pile (1996: 2) for arguments against seeing space as a 
‘passive, abstract arena on which things happen’ and the debt that this 
realisation owes to thinkers such as Jameson and Soja.

Introduction 
18 
The field of life writing is one that is currently enjoying a 
similarly significant renaissance. In general terms, where it was once 
deemed immodest and unseemly to discuss the self, the individual has 
become a matter of current popular fascination. Perhaps more cru-
cially, much contemporary theory has hailed a focus on individual 
lives as the best way to generate ‘situated’ or ‘embodied’ knowledge 
and therefore to avoid sweeping generalisations about whole societies. 
In more specifically literary terms, whilst life writing was long treated 
as a ‘factual’ and ‘referential’ art that had little contribution to make to 
the creative domain of literature, the field has garnered considerably 
more respect in recent decades. As my discussion in chapter 2 will 
reveal, life writing has begun to be recognised as a locus of literary 
innovation as contemporary writers experiment with all aspects of 
form and structure, and a wider definition of life writing allows those 
previously excluded from the genre, particularly women and those in 
the developing world, to be accepted into the mainstream (see Smith 
and Watson 1992). Not only has the production of autobiographical 
texts proliferated in recent times, then, but critical perceptions of the 
genre have also become more favourable. 
The two realms in which this study is grounded – space and life 
writing- are linked by their particular relevance to the contemporary 
world. In fact, the sphere of French Studies provides a particularly 
appropriate domain in which to juxtapose these two fields. The 
reasons for this are threefold. Firstly, whilst the ‘New Cultural 
Geography’, a movement that has played a significant role in explor-
ing the new nature and status of space in the contemporary world, is 
unmistakeably Anglophone in provenance, it is important to note that 
some of the most rigorous scholarship in theorising the Geography-
Literary Studies relationship has occurred within the French-speaking 
world.2 Secondly, the Francophone world is one in which there has 
been particularly noteworthy scholarship in both the theorisation and 
the production of life writing texts. As my discussion in chapter 2 will 
reveal, Philippe Lejeune’s Le Pacte autobiographique (1975) and his 
subsequent studies have provided the international benchmark against 
which autobiographical literature and its criticism is judged. Thirdly, 
the debate about postmodernism with which I will argue understand-
                                                 
2 
As I will discuss in more detail in chapter 1, the work of Marc Brosseau is 
exemplary in this field.

Introduction 
19 
ings of contemporary space to be inextricably entwined, resonates 
particularly deeply across the Francophone world.3 As Max Silverman 
points out in Facing Postmodernity: Contemporary French Thought 
on Culture and Society (1999: 5-6), the already contentious debate en-
gendered by postmodernism rages all the more furiously in France 
because of the threat that the notion poses to the cherished French 
ideals of the Enlightenment and the tradition of Modernity. It seems 
that the domain of French Cultural Study is a particularly appropriate 
arena in which to explore the rich, and topical, questions that arise 
from the juxtaposition of contemporary life writing and spatial analy-
sis. 
This study will, then, locate itself upon a distinctly interdiscipli-
nary terrain. It will engage with a wide range of critical discourses, 
including the emerging body of theory within the ‘New Cultural 
Geography’; the work of longer established theorists of the spatial 
such as Michel Foucault and Gaston Bachelard; and notions of con-
temporary life writing and postmodernism. Seeking to bring into 
dialogue current ideas about space and spatial belonging with a 
selected range of twentieth-century French life writing texts, my study 
will not tread a well-worn academic path. It is clear that undertaking 
spatial readings of particular literary texts is not an endeavour without 
precedent within Literary Studies, and nor is it unheard of for Geogra-
phers to seek recourse to literary texts in order to substantiate their 
hypotheses. However, in this study it is hoped to move some way 
towards establishing a more rigorous dialogue between the two 
domains of study. Rather than using literary examples in order to 
‘prove’ a preconceived geographical hypothesis, or sticking to a few 
well-worn categories of spatial analysis such as ‘the urban’ in order to 
evaluate a literary text, in this monograph the channels of communica-
tion between the two fields will be opened up. It is hoped to demon-
strate that, just as the particular analytic tools proffered by geographi-
cal theory will allow us to deepen our understanding of a literary text, 
so the close study of life writing texts may provide a unique insight 
                                                 
3 
In this monograph I shall consciously use the term ‘Francophone’ to refer to 
all parts of the French-speaking world, including France itself. This slightly 
unusual practice is a response to recent debates that highlight the somewhat 
arbitrary nature of any attempt to suggest the coherence between such diverse 
countries as Belgium, Quebec and Francophone Africa, whilst maintaining 
France to be in some way distinct.

Introduction 
20 
into ways of living in space. Moreover, this monograph will seek to 
move away from the view that spatial analysis should be confined to 
those writings that obviously engage with specifically spatial phenom-
ena.4 All life experience, and hence all life writing, occurs within and 
is mediated by space. Similarly, life writing not only represents space 
but also plays a constitutive role in forming the spaces and cultures 
that it depicts.5 
The structure of this monograph will be based around six 
distinct chapters. In chapter 1, the study will begin with a detailed 
interrogation of the contention that space has become more important 
in recent times. I will discuss the key theories that underpin both the 
critical reappraisal of contemporary space and the suggestion that the 
experience and nature of space have undergone a significant transfor-
mation in the contemporary world. Arguing these contentions to be 
fundamentally bound up with notions of postmodernism, I will seek to 
elaborate a model through which this complex and contentious notion 
can be usefully mobilised. Moreover, in order to forge a coherent criti-
cal framework for this study, my discussion of space will be rounded 
off with an examination of the history of contact between the disci-
plines of Geography and Literary Studies. That is to say that in order 
to delimit the precise position that this work will occupy, I will outline 
to what extent and in what ways interdisciplinary contact between 
spatial and literary studies has already occurred, and the theoretical 
stances and popular perceptions upon which such work has been 
grounded will be evaluated. Chapter 1 will conclude, then, with an 
elaboration of the precise scholarly niche that this study aspires to 
occupy. 
Chapter 2 will furnish the second major theoretical input into 
this monograph. Focusing upon the field of life writing, I will seek in 
                                                 
4 
Linden Peach, for example, in a paper entitled ‘Nation, Internal Difference 
and the New Geography’ suggests that the specific attributes of postmodern 
geography make it a particularly ‘appropriate model with which to discuss 
[…] writing by members of ethnic minority groups’. See Peach (1997: 9-29). 
5 
As the editors of a special edition of the journal Canadian Literature 
dedicated to autobiography and life writing recently argued, ‘we live in an 
auto/biographical age that uses the personal narrative as a lens onto history 
and the contemporary world. In every medium, cultures are permeated and 
increasingly transformed by auto/biographical narratives, productions and 
performances of identity’ (Egan and Helms 2002: 5-6).

Introduction 
21 
this chapter to adumbrate some of the most important elements of 
contemporary life writing. The underlying premises of conventional 
autobiography will be briefly outlined before the focus shifts onto the 
generic complexities of autofiction, a cultural phenomenon that will 
play a significant role in this study. The latter half of this chapter will 
be taken up by the introduction of the three writers upon whose work 
my discussion will focus: Hervé Guibert; Serge Doubrovsky and 
Régine Robin. I will sketch out their literary motivations and beliefs 
as well as introducing the particular works that will feature in this 
study. 
In chapters 3, 4 and 5, I will offer a close reading of the life 
writing texts of each of these three authors in turn. Seeking to avoid 
merely ‘proving’ or ‘disproving’ those geographical hypotheses ad-
vanced in chapter 1, the content of each of these chapters will be dic-
tated by my reading of the pieces of literature themselves. That is to 
say that my analysis will draw attention to those spatial features that I 
judge to be of greatest importance within each individual literary cor-
pus. When elements of compatibility with the spatial theory advanced 
in chapter 1 are evident, then this will be highlighted. It is in chapter 
6, entitled ‘Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography’, that the links 
between the different elements of this study will be made evident. 
Here, I will seek to examine the extent to which the life writings of 
Guibert, Doubrovsky and Robin can each be said to constitute a form 
of mapping of the postmodern world, a notion that will be introduced 
more rigorously in chapter 1. 
Through the exploration of a selected range of life writing texts, 
then, my study seeks to establish the extent to which the realms of 
literature and spatial analysis can be brought into dialogue. It is hoped 
to shed light not only upon the ways in which space is represented in 
literature, but also upon some of the fundamental questions about 
identity and belonging that the contemporary experience of space have 
rendered so pressing.

1. 
Space and Literature 
 
 
It has become commonplace in recent decades to begin any discussion 
of contemporary space with a citation from the work of Fredric 
Jameson. This Marxist professor of literature’s contention that ‘we 
live in spacious times’ (see, for example, Jameson cited in Thacker 
2003: 1) has become the over-worn emblem of a pervasive debate. 
The central tenet of Jameson’s argument proclaims that there has been 
a paradigmatic shift in the character and status of space in the last few 
decades. The significance of Jameson’s contribution to this field can 
be attributed more to his role in increasing awareness of the debate 
about space than to the unusual nature of his arguments. Several other 
eminent theorists have expressed similar views about the importance 
of space in the contemporary world.1 The French philosopher Michel 
Foucault, for example, in a posthumously published piece entitled 
‘Des espaces autres’, asserted that ‘l’époque actuelle serait peut-être 
[…] l’époque de l’espace’ (1984: 46). Later in the piece, he reiterated 
this with the words ‘en tout cas, je crois que l’inquiétude 
d’aujourd’hui concerne fondamentalement l’espace, sans doute beau-
coup plus que le temps’ (1984: 47). Henri Lefebvre, a philosopher 
who has become particularly well known for his work on urban space, 
has gone so far as to argue that time is being ontologically and epis-
                                                           
1 
It is not intended here to rehearse in depth the now established and detailed 
arguments about precise definitions of space and place. For the purposes of 
this discussion it is sufficient to note that ‘space’ is often seen to be a physical 
entity classifiable primarily by its dimensions or by what it contains, whereas 
‘place’ is more often seen to be a fixed site within space and entails connota-
tions of human attachment, emotional investment or human habitation. A 
seminal text on this topic is Yi-Fu Tuan’s Space and Place: The Perspective 
of Experience (Tuan 1977). An excellent discussion of the concepts of space 
and place can also be found in chapter 1, ‘Theorising Space and Place in 
Modernism’ in Andrew Thacker’s Moving Through Modernity: Space and 
Geography in Modernism (Thacker 2003: 13-45).

Space and Literature 
24 
temologically killed off in favour of space in the contemporary world 
(Lefebvre cited in Shields 1997: 188). It seems, then, that there is sig-
nificant support for the notion that space has become more important 
in recent times. Indeed, indicating the depth of his belief in the agency 
and importance of space, Lefebvre has also argued that ‘to change life 
[…] we must first change space’ (Lefebvre 1991: 190). And it is 
clearly necessary to pre-empt this assertion with the remark that be-
fore we can change either space or life, we must first understand space 
and understand why these claims about space are being made. 
Awareness of space has been heightened in many areas of life 
in recent times. Within the academic world, whilst there has been a 
clear surge of interest in the last three decades in the academic disci-
pline most bound up with space, that of geography,2 it is also evident 
that the preoccupation with space has become increasingly interdisci-
plinary. Across the Arts and Humanities there has been growing rec-
ognition that spatial analysis may shed light on many of the most 
pressing foci of debate. For example, at the level of the individual, 
space is increasingly recognised to be implicated in identity formation 
(Benko and Ulf Strohmayer 1997: 115). At the level of society, space 
is argued to be inextricably interlinked with social power relations and 
hierarchies and therefore to underpin all social relationships.3 It is tell-
ing that two North American geographers assert that ‘the language of 
social and cultural investigation is increasingly suffused with spatial 
concepts in a way that would have been unimaginable two decades 
ago’ (Smith and Katz 1996: 67). Indeed, one of the most striking indi-
cations of growing awareness of the importance of space is to be 
found in the arena of language. Social and cultural geographers within 
the English-speaking world have been particularly quick to comment 
upon the greater frequency with which spatial terminology and spatial 
metaphors now occur in both academic and everyday language. As the 
                                                           
2 
For assertions of the growing status of geography in recent times, see Dennis 
Crow, Geography and Identity: Living and Exploring the Geopolitics of Iden-
tity (Crow 1996: 4) and Paul Claval, ‘La géographie sociale et culturelle’ 
(Claval 1998: 100). 
3 
On the importance of space within cultural studies and sociology see chapter 
10 ‘Cultural Space and Urban Place’ of Barker’s Cultural Studies: Theory and 
Practice (Barker 2000). For the importance of space within literary studies see 
Norquay and Smyth (1997).

Space and Literature 
25 
British cultural geographers Steve Pile and Nigel Thrift note, in social 
and cultural theory identity is ‘mapped out’ through the inherently 
spatial notions of mobility, transculturation and diaspora (Pile and 
Thrift 1995a: 10; see also Peach 1997: 20). Moreover, power relations 
are increasingly articulated in spatially-inspired terminology and 
metaphors, including not only ‘position’; ‘location’; and ‘situation’, 
but also ‘centre-periphery’; ‘global-local’ and ‘inside-outside’. The in-
fluence of geographical analogies clearly extends far beyond the scope 
of academic discourse, frequently being employed in everyday lan-
guage in order to ‘map out uncertainties’, and to ‘look for common 
ground’ (Smith and Katz 1996: 67 and Keith and Pile 1996: 6-7). 
The assertion by those such as Jameson, Foucault and Lefebvre, 
then, that space has become more important in recent times certainly 
seems to be endorsed by three developments: the growth in status of 
the spatial science of geography; the increasingly evident interdisci-
plinary preoccupation with space; and the ever more prevalent usage 
of geographical analogies in language. However, it is important to 
note that mounting awareness of the importance of space should not 
be confused with the growing familiarity of space. Nor should we as-
sume that space has become more widely understood in recent times. 
It is perhaps unsurprising that the more prevalent space becomes 
within academic and everyday discourses, the greater the consterna-
tion amongst many geographers. Rob Shields asserts, for example, 
that the increasingly pervasive and often careless use of spatial notions 
and metaphors has eroded ‘the geographical language of space’. He 
contends that ‘we can no longer speak without confusion about 
“space” or even “social space”’ (Shields 1997: 186). The fear that spa-
tial analysis and geographical terminology may be rendered meaning-
less by frequent misuse is far from groundless.4 The problem is ren-
dered particularly acute by the fact that many of those who adopt spa-
tial terminology and spatial metaphors do so without any rigorous at-
tempt to understand to what, precisely, they are referring. As Gillian 
Rose, a feminist geographer of considerable repute, asserts, common 
uses of spatial language frequently rely upon a general unthinking ac-
                                                           
4 
For discussions of the dangers of insufficiently rigorous uses of spatial meta-
phors and spatial notions see Smith and Katz (1996: 67-80) and Keith and Pile 
(1996: 35-36).

Space and Literature 
26 
ceptance of the old, commonsense fixity and familiarity of space 
(Rose 1996: 57). It seems, then, that whilst space may have gained 
prominence within academic enquiry, the topic is not always suffi-
ciently carefully interrogated. Marc Augé, a French ethnographer, as-
serts that ‘nous vivons dans un monde que nous n’avons pas encore 
appris à regarder. Il nous faut réapprendre à penser l’espace’ (Augé 
1992: 49). It seems difficult to disagree with the need for greater, 
more rigorous analysis of space in the current period. 
Furthermore, we must recognise not only that changes in con-
temporary space are difficult to understand, but also that the argument 
by Jameson with which I opened this discussion is considerably more 
ambitious than might at first be realised. Jameson does not merely 
propose that there has been a critical revaluation of space and that this 
formerly underestimated aspect of life has at last been elevated to the 
position it has always merited. On the contrary, he argues that the very 
nature of space has undergone a fundamental transformation in recent 
times. It is this change, according to Jameson, rather than a mere shift 
in our understanding of this elementary aspect of the world, that has 
thrust space into a more prominent role. What arguments, then, might 
we find to support this radical hypothesis? 
The work of Marc Augé provides a particularly helpful starting 
place for a discussion of this question. In Non-lieux: introduction à 
une anthropologie de la surmodernité (1992), Augé advances the ar-
gument that the contemporary experience of space has been affected 
by recent technological developments. Amongst these Augé lists ‘les 
spectaculaires accélérations des moyens de transport’ (1992: 48). In-
deed, the speed and ease with which it is possible for individuals to 
travel across the earth’s surface is irrefutable. The inevitable result of 
this, we can infer from Augé’s work, is the erosion, or at least modifi-
cation, of perceptions of distance and separation that ordered space in 
the past. This is not to say that travel and movement are new features 
of individual and cultural experience,5 but rather that the scale and 
ease with which people move over large and small spaces is unprece-
dented. The growth in individual mobility has been accompanied, ac-
                                                           
5 
As James Clifford argues, ‘everyone’s on the move, and has been for centu-
ries’ (1997:2).

Space and Literature 
27 
cording to Augé, by a revolution in telecommunications. Augé asserts 
that 
dans l’intimité de nos demeures, enfin, des images de toutes sortes, re-
layées par les satellites, captées par les antennas qui hérissent les toits 
du plus reculé de nos villages, peuvent nous donner une vision instan-
tanée et parfois simultanée d’un événement en train de se produire à 
l’autre bout de la planète. (Augé 1992: 44) 
 
The impact of these communications technologies upon the experi-
ence of distance and space is, again, significant. Augé points out that 
the consequences of the shifts in our relationship with space that result 
from transport and telecommunications developments are paradoxical: 
the world becomes more knowable and more easily traversed, and yet 
we are bewildered by our awareness of the small and insignificant 
space we occupy in the overall scheme of things. Augé’s work, then, 
provides a valuable discussion of the ways in which the contemporary 
era is marked by the impacts of ‘space-adjusting technologies’.6 The 
prevalence of catchphrases such as the ‘shrinking world’ and the 
‘global village’7 in everyday discourse indicates the extent to which 
awareness of these changes in space has permeated all aspects of soci-
ety. 
Of course, in addition to the shifts in the experience of space 
that Augé attributes to technological change, it is of paramount impor-
tance to recognise the impact of recent transformations in the geopo-
litical ordering of space. The shift away from formal imperialism and 
colonialism in the twentieth century represented the end of a phase of 
clear organisation of the world into discrete, mappable spaces that 
were relatively unambiguously positioned within a global hierarchy.8 
                                                           
6 
The term ‘space-adjusting technologies’ is used by Peter Dicken and Peter E. 
Lloyd in Modern Western Society: A Geographical Perspective on Work, 
Home and Well-Being (1981: 45). A related term, ‘disembedding mecha-
nisms’, is used to refer to communications technologies by David Morley 
(2000: 149). 
7 
A discussion of the implications of the term ‘global village’, along with the 
notion’s founder, Marshall McLuhan, is to be found in Brian Jarvis’s Post-
modern Cartographies: The Geographical Imagination in Contemporary 
American Culture (1998). See particularly Chapter 3 ‘How I Learned to Stop 
Worrying and Love the Mediascape: Marshall McLuhan’. 
8 
David Morley correctly points out that this sense of the world being clearly 
organised during the colonial period may apply more to those in the West than

Space and Literature 
28 
This system has been replaced in the late twentieth- and early twenty-
first century by the more hidden forces of neo-colonialism, post-
colonialism and multinational capital. The argument that a simply de-
marcated pattern of nation states with clear governance over particular 
spaces has been latterly replaced by deregulated, global flows of mul-
tinational capital that know no national boundaries is particularly evi-
dent in recent academic thought. Writing in a volume entitled Ques-
tions of Travel: Postmodern Discourses of Displacement (1996), 
Caren Kaplan highlights the impact of these changes upon individuals. 
She tells us that as a result of the increasingly pervasive nature of 
transnational capital ‘the solid association between national spaces 
and identities becomes loosened’ (Kaplan 1996: 9). In the present age, 
people and goods may be compelled to travel across national bounda-
ries according to the logic of capital and irrespective of the implica-
tions for their identity or their political affiliations.9 
Perhaps one of the most important results of the transformation 
of space in recent decades has been the proliferation, on global and lo-
cal scales, of opportunities for everyday contact between different cul-
tures. The significance of this for both individuals and societies cannot 
be overestimated. Augé asserts that the establishment of a united sense 
of place has traditionally been of paramount importance in the ground-
ing of identities. Echoing the well-known work of Benedict Anderson 
on ‘imagined communities’, he defines sense of place as ‘[un] fantas-
me indigène, d’une société ancrée depuis des temps immémoriaux 
dans la pérennité d’un terroir inentamé au-delà duquel rien n’est plus 
véritablement pensable’ (Augé 1992: 59).10 In view of this, the un-
dermining of the simple ordering and separation of distinct cultures in 
different spaces must clearly call into question the traditional ways in 
which individuals and communities have rooted themselves into 
space. This argument is reinforced by the prevalence within current 
academic literature of theories of transcultural spaces and cultural 
                                                                                                                             
to those in countries that were colonised and which, subsequently, experi-
enced considerable cultural dislocation (Morley 2000: 195). 
9 
Laura U. Marks, for example, tells us that ‘the powers at work in global 
movements of people are increasingly less those of nations than of corpora-
tions, whose transnational power has begun to exceed that of governments’ 
(Marks 2000: 9).  
10 
For Benedict Anderson on ‘Imagined Communities’ see Anderson (1983).

Space and Literature 
29 
contact zones, as well as notions of composite cultural identities and 
double consciousnesses.11 Any traditional sense of being rooted un-
problematically in space has been undermined. 
Perhaps, then, the contemporary experience of space is neatly 
summed up in James Clifford’s assertion in The Predicament of Cul-
ture (1988: 6) that ‘people and things are increasingly out of place’? 
The work of Fredric Jameson acquiesces with such a view. Alongside 
his argument that the contemporary world has undergone a ‘mutation 
in built space’ (Jameson 1984: 80), Jameson stresses the bewilderment 
that has resulted from this change. He argues that ‘our now postmod-
ern bodies are bereft of spatial coordinates and practically (let alone 
theoretically) incapable of distantiation’ (1984: 87). And here, per-
haps, we reach the kernel of Jameson’s argument. Rather than relying 
upon vague assertions that changes in space have taken place in ‘the 
contemporary period’ or ‘the current age’, Jameson contends that in-
trinsic to transformations in contemporary space has been the emer-
gence of the postmodern era. In his 1990 essay, Postmodernism, or the 
Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism, Jameson asserts that ‘space is the 
“supremely mediatory function” in the construction of a postmodern 
society’ (Jameson 1991: 104). Similarly, many theorists have high-
lighted the link between spatial change and the emergence of the 
‘postmodern era’. In examinations of space and spatial analysis over 
the last three decades, the term ‘postmodern’ appears frequently (see 
Kaplan 1996: 8 and Peach 1997: 9). Far from clarifying the spatial de-
bate, however, the contested and controversial nature of postmodern-
ism throws further doubt into the equation. Since its conception, the 
term ‘postmodern’ has garnered considerable attention but little con-
sensus. David Harvey, a leading Marxist academic and major player in 
the debate about postmodernism, is far from isolated in arguing that 
‘no one exactly agrees as to what is meant by the term [postmodern]’ 
(Harvey 1989: 7). 
                                                           
11 
For a discussion of transcultural spaces see David Tomas, Transcultural 
Space and Transcultural Beings (1996: 9). For cultural contact zones see 
Mary Louise Pratt, Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation 
(1992: 4). On notions of composite or ‘creolised’ cultural identities see 
Edouard Glissant’s (1996) Introduction à une poétique du divers. For a dis-
cussion of the notion of double consciousnesses see Paul Gilroy (1993), The 
Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness.

Space and Literature 
30 
The transformation of space and the concomitant upheaval in 
established ways of belonging to particular places and grounding iden-
tities clearly generates a wealth of interesting topics of study. It is 
clear, however, that the two fundamental axes underpinning this arena 
of enquiry cannot be taken for granted. Contemporary space, it seems, 
is much discussed but often insufficiently rigorously investigated, and 
the postmodern is a minefield of conflicting and shifting positions. In 
order to establish a theoretical basis for the literary articulations of 
home space and cultural belonging that I will undertake in this mono-
graph, this chapter will anatomise, centrally, the changing nature of 
space in recent decades. In order to do so, it will seek first to establish 
what exactly is meant by the postmodern, and how this might be said 
to have impacted upon space in recent times. After establishing a basis 
upon which to discuss contemporary space in general, my discussion 
will pursue potential definitions of home space and cultural belonging 
as a preparation for a key thematic focus of the study. In the second 
half of this chapter I will investigate institutional responses to the 
changing nature of space, as well as the recent history, current state 
and future prognosis of inter-disciplinary exchanges between the dis-
ciplines of geography and literary studies, disciplines that inflect di-
rectly the research project pursued in this monograph. 
 
 
1.0 Postmodernism and Space: A Critical Framework 
The Postmodern: A Contested Field 
 
The term ‘postmodern’, like its close relations ‘postmodernism’ and 
‘postmodernity’, is deeply contested. Indeed, as Niall Lucy argues, it 
has become a cliché to comment on the unsatisfactory nature of efforts 
to define the ‘postmodern’ (Lucy 1997: 63). It is certainly true that 
there is little consensus within the academic community about any as-
pect of the phenomenon. In a particularly helpful discussion entitled 
The Politics of Theory: Ideological Positions in the Postmodern De-
bate (1984), Fredric Jameson systematically explicates the varying 
stances that key theorists have adopted in relation to the postmodern. 
Divergence exists not only in terms of the different positions particu-
lar individuals adopt in relation to the perceived positive or negative

Space and Literature 
31 
attributes of the postmodern, but also, to a lesser extent, in relation to 
the ongoing interrogation of the very existence of the postmodern.12 
What, then, are the major sources of contention within debates about 
the postmodern? 
A particularly heated aspect of the debate focuses upon whether 
the postmodern should be employed to describe the characteristics of 
the present historical moment, or whether it should be understood as a 
set of cultural trends and processes that potentially exist at any mo-
ment in history.13 Umberto Eco is a clear proponent of the latter argu-
ment, subscribing to the theory that the postmodern represents ‘a 
Kunstwollen, a way of doing’ that exists within every age.14 Fredric 
Jameson’s arguments on the subject are often cited as supporting the 
opposite point of view (see Benko 1997: 12). That is to say that, per-
haps because of Jameson’s Marxist emphasis on the importance of 
history in characterising the various stages of development of the 
world, he is deemed to support the notion that the postmodern cannot 
be dissociated from the present historical period. It is certainly true 
that one of Jameson’s most influential contributions to the debate has 
been to argue that the postmodern is fundamentally bound up with the 
                                                           
12 
In ‘The Politics of Theory: Ideological Positions in the Postmodernism De-
bate’, Jameson cites Tafuri as an example of someone who is highly sceptical 
of the existence of postmodernism. However, Jameson goes on to argue that 
‘the point is that we are within the culture of postmodernism to the point 
where its facile repudiation is as impossible as any equally facile celebration 
of it is complacent and corrupt’ (Jameson 1988: 381). In this monograph the 
term ‘postmodern’ will continue to be used on the grounds that it is the most 
useful term available when discussing the changes in contemporary society 
and space in the late twentieth and early twenty-first-century. As the discus-
sion in this chapter will show, however, the use of this contested term will be 
made with full reference to the many convincing arguments that have high-
lighted its imperfect nature.  
13 
In fact, the distinction is often occluded by the unthinking conflation of the 
term ‘postmodern-ism’ with ‘postmodern-ity’, and vice versa. As Terry Eagle-
ton argues in his generally sceptical discussion of the postmodern, The Illu-
sions of Postmodernism (1996), postmodern-ism refers to a form of contempo-
rary culture, whereas postmodern-ity relates to a specific historical period. 
Whilst both notions share many characterising features, they are clearly not 
synonymous. See Eagleton 1996: vii. 
14 
See Benko (1997c: 12). This view is similarly held by Susan Buck-Morss, 
cited by Pred (1997: 121).

Space and Literature 
32 
latest mutation of capitalism. In this, Jameson contends that the post-
modern is interlinked with the postindustrial world, representing the 
cultural logic of late capitalism. This assertion clearly locates the 
postmodern within a particular period in time. Jameson’s argument 
also proposes that the postmodern comprises more than an autono-
mous aesthetic or cultural trend that could exist alongside any domi-
nant socio-economic regime at any period in time. This argument has 
gained considerable credence since Jameson set it out in detail in 
1990.15 Jameson’s already convincing position is further reinforced by 
the nuanced view of postmodernity that he advances. He does not, for 
example, assert sweepingly that the postmodern dominates every as-
pect of the present historical moment. On the contrary, he specifically 
asserts that ‘I am very far from feeling that all cultural production to-
day is “postmodern”’ (Jameson 1984: 57). And he proposes a model 
in which the postmodern is a ‘dominant force field’ against which al-
ternative cultural impulses must, and do fight (Jameson 1984: 57).16 
Comparison of the fundamental characteristics of the postmodern with 
those of late capitalism certainly demonstrates many clearly visible 
correlations, a topic to which my discussion will return. 
Deeply intertwined with the argument about the periodization 
of postmodernism is the debate about the extent to which the post-
modern can be said to comprise a radical break from all that is classi-
fied as modern. The uses of slightly varying appellations such as ‘late 
modernity’; ‘post-modernity’; ‘postmodernity’; and ‘supermodernity’ 
reflect the ongoing controversy surrounding this subject. Indeed, this 
area is one in which diverging viewpoints between Anglophone and 
Francophone academic communities are particularly evident. Whilst 
the French-speaking world has generally embraced the notion of the 
                                                           
15 
In fact this is an area in which there has been divergence between Franco-
phone and Anglophone academic communities. As Eleanore Kofman and 
Elizabeth Lebas argue, there ‘is much less interest in France in periodizations 
of postmodernism as a cultural logic of late capitalism or space-time compres-
sion. For example, neither Jameson nor Harvey have been translated’ (Kof-
man and Lebas 1996: 46). 
16 
Also, in the extended, monograph-length version of Postmodernism, or the 
Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism, Jameson specifically comments that shreds 
of that which came before postmodernism, such as realism and modernism, 
are still in evidence (Jameson 1991: xii).

Space and Literature 
33 
postmodern less readily than the Anglophone one, it has reserved par-
ticular scepticism for claims that the postmodern represents a com-
plete break with the past.17 French theorists have often emphasised the 
development or exaggeration of pre-existing trends within a frame-
work of overall continuity rather than understanding contemporary 
changes as indicating rupture with that which preceded. Marc Augé, 
for example, consistently uses the term ‘supermodernity’ rather than 
‘postmodernity’, and contends that this is a state in which ‘les compo-
santes s’additionnent sans se détruire’ (Augé 1992: 58).18 Augé fa-
vours the notion that supermodernity is characterised by the accelera-
tion and exaggeration of past trends rather than their disruption or re-
versal. He asserts that arguments accepting this 
 
permettent d’appréhender [la surmodernité] sans en ignorer les com-
plexitiés et les contradictions, mais sans en faire non plus l’horizon 
indépassable d’une modernité perdue dont nous n’aurions plus qu’à 
relever les traces, répertorier les isolats ou inventorier les archives. 
(Augé 1992: 55)  
 
Similarly, Baudrillard uses the term ‘hyperreality’ which also suggests 
the exaggeration of existing trends rather than something entirely new. 
The literary theorist Niall Lucy, however, in his enlightening work, 
Postmodern Literary Theory: an Introduction (1997), clearly articu-
lates the opposite viewpoint. In his comparison of the intellectual 
classes of modernism and postmodernism, for example, he states 
overtly that the latter is characterised by radical discontinuity with the 
                                                           
17 
Unsurprisingly a diverse range of attitudes towards the postmodern exist 
within the French-speaking world. For example, it seems that the notion of 
postmodernism has greater standing in Quebec than in France. For a discus-
sion of this see Lucie-Marie Magnan and Christian Morin’s Lectures du post-
modernisme dans le roman québécois (1997: 10). Moreover, it would be sim-
plistic to argue that all Anglophone theorists believe postmodernism to repre-
sent a complete break with the past. Clifford, for example, talks about ‘an un-
finished modernity’, seeming to suggest that postmodernity is the latest stage 
within Modernity. See Clifford (1997: 2). 
18 
This view is supported by that of Baudrillard. Like Augé, he argues that rather 
than a complete loss of meaning, the postmodern is dominated by an excess of 
meaning. In this, it is perhaps the plurality and chaotic juxtaposition of belief 
systems, rather than their erosion altogether, which makes meaning impossi-
ble. See Rodaway (1995: 241).

Space and Literature 
34 
former, and that the moment of rupture can be pinned down specifi-
cally to the 1960s (Lucy 1997: 20). What position, then, are we to 
adopt in relation to such unmistakeably contradictory arguments?  
In order to adopt a convincing position on this topic, it is neces-
sary to focus briefly upon Modernism. In particular, it is important to 
note the complex and sometimes unstable nature of Modernism, some-
thing that theorists of the postmodern frequently ignore. Richard Mur-
phy, in his 1999 study of the Modernist Avant-Garde, contends that 
Modernism was a far from united movement. He stresses the fact that 
not only was there a diverse range of movements within the Modern, 
but that the very character of Modernism relied upon continual inno-
vation and change. The inadvisability of attempting to construct Mod-
ernism as a concrete and stable entity in opposition to which postmod-
ernism can be defined, is clear. The middle ground in this argument 
seems the best place upon which to base a logical response: the post-
modern is perhaps best characterised as a collage comprising some as-
pects of Modernism that have survived intact; some aspects of Mod-
ernism that have been exaggerated; and some Modernist traits that 
have been radically rejected and reversed. In addition, it is highly un-
usual, but important, to recognise that the postmodern also comprises 
features of some of the movements that preceded Modernism, includ-
ing romanticism.19 
Yet another significant aspect of postmodernism that admits 
ambiguity concerns the phenomenon’s geographical scope. Whilst 
theories about the postmodern are frequently held to refer to the world 
in general, it is clear that their true spatial relevance is more specific.20 
As I shall argue presently, it is primarily the challenge to Western 
value-systems that is embedded in the emergence of postmodernism, 
and it is the condition of Western cities and cultures that most discus-
sions of postmodernism treat. That is not to say that postmodernism 
has no relevance to the world in general: Wang Ning, a leading theo-
rist of the postmodern in China, for example, highlights the promi-
                                                           
19 
For an interesting discussion of the relationship between romanticism and 
postmodernism, see Lucy (1997: 227-249). 
20 
In fact, Fredric Jameson is unusual in overtly highlighting his belief that 
‘postmodern culture is a superstructural expression of American military and 
economic domination in the world’. See Peet (1998: 216).

Space and Literature 
35 
nence of postmodern theory in contemporary Chinese academia (Ning 
2000: 222). It remains important, however, to avoid the blind ethno-
centricity that might result from making generalisations about post-
modernism as if it applied equally to all areas of the highly diverse 
and complex surface of the earth.21 Indeed, whereas postmodern dis-
ruptions of value systems may be experienced as disorientating for 
those in the West, Wang Ning specifically highlights the fact that they 
are often seized upon by non-Western countries as welcome strategies 
for resisting Western domination. The decline of powerful Western 
thought-systems, then, clearly does not represent the same upheaval to 
formerly colonised countries and those countries resisting neo-
colonialism that it does to the West. 
How, then, is it possible to mobilise productively the complex, 
much-contested concept of the postmodern? Paul Rodaway, a British 
human geographer, argues that ‘the value of the term lies in its provi-
sional character and its continuous metamorphosis’ (Rodaway 1995: 
245). Wang Ning similarly argues that the term ‘postmodernism’ is so 
mobile that it should be redefined every five years (Ning 2000: 222). 
Such assertions, whilst supported by considerable evidence, seem to 
suggest that the postmodern is too slippery a phenomenon to charac-
terise and therefore can be of little use in conventional analysis. I wish 
to contend, however, that despite its diverse, shifting and sometimes 
contradictory nature, it is possible to identify a relatively coherent set 
of characteristics with which the postmodern is consistently imbued. 
As Terry Eagleton argues, the postmodern’s only unity lies in a set of 
‘family resemblances’ (Eagleton 1996: 22). What, then, might be said 
to be those dominant characteristics or ‘family resemblances’ that 
characterise the postmodern? 
 
 
The Postmodern: Key Characteristics 
 
The French philosopher Jean-François Lyotard has made a particularly 
significant and enduring contribution to the attempt to characterise 
postmodernism. In La Condition postmoderne: rapport sur le savoir 
                                                           
21 
It would also be highly ironic to construct an overarching, global metanarra-
tive of postmodernism, as will become clear a little later in my discussion.

Space and Literature 
36 
(1979), Lyotard’s central hypothesis revolves around the notion that 
the emergence of the postmodern era is fundamentally interlinked 
with a change in the status of knowledge. He argues that in Modern 
times there was widespread belief in a number of dominant philoso-
phical ‘grands récits’. Amongst these, Lyotard lists ‘la dialéctique de 
l’Esprit’, ‘l’herméneutique du sens’ and ‘l’émancipation du sujet rai-
sonnable ou travailleur’ (Lyotard 1979: 7). He characterises each of 
these grand narratives as a ‘dispositif métanarratif de légitimation’, 
and argues that they provided society with clear meaning systems 
through which to organise its activities and establish its moral order. 
Lyotard suggests, however, that since the 1950s, the influence of these 
‘grands récits’ has diminished to the extent that the postmodern world 
is dominated by ‘l’incrédulité à l’égard des métarécits’ (1979: 7). The 
implications of this shift are clearly far-reaching. For example, 
whereas notions such as scientific advancement, technological devel-
opment and human progress used to constitute important collective 
goals for Western societies, they have been replaced in postmodern-
ism by a widespread scepticism about the salvatory power of science, 
the inevitability of human progress, and the possibility of universal 
truths. Crucially, according to Lyotard, the old ‘grand narratives’ have 
been replaced in influence by multinational capitalism. That is to say 
that businesses and even nation-states seek to legitimise their activities 
through notions of efficiency and productivity rather than on idealistic 
or humanist grounds. Concomitantly, knowledge is valued less be-
cause of its potential contribution to ‘la formation de l’Esprit’ or the 
development of society, than because it may be sold and consumed. 
Power is, as a consequence, increasingly synonymous with capital.22 
Lyotard’s hypothesis of the breakdown of the over-arching 
grand narratives that give meaning to society has become a corner-
stone of postmodern theory.23 Indeed, it is from this theory that many 
                                                           
22 
See Peet (1998: 14 and 76). In this, Lyotard’s argument can clearly be seen to 
concur with Jameson’s controversial assertion that the postmodern is funda-
mentally bound up with changes in the economic nature of the world, namely 
the penetration of multinational capitalism. It is important to note, however, 
that Lyotard and Jameson speak from distinctly different political positions, 
Lyotard being highly sceptical of Marxism. 
23 
It is cited, for example, by Benko (1997: 8); Lucy (1997: 58); Seidman (1994: 
5). In fact, Fredric Jameson expresses some scepticism about Lyotard’s theory 
of the breakdown of master narratives, particularly because the theory itself

Space and Literature 
37 
of the other frequently cited characteristics of the postmodern can be 
teased out. For example, as postmodern societies are no longer unified 
either by collective projects or by coherent notions of ‘ideal citizens’, 
they are increasingly characterised by diversity. A return to the writ-
ings of Fredric Jameson highlights his subscription to this theory. He 
argues that ‘the advanced capitalist countries today are now a field of 
stylistic and discursive heterogeneity without a norm’ (Jameson 1984: 
65). Another anglophone Marxist scholar and leading theorist of the 
postmodern, David Harvey, similarly argues that ‘postmodernism 
swims, even wallows, in the fragmentation and the chaotic currents of 
change as if that is all there is’ (Harvey 1989: 44). Whether such het-
erogeneity represents greater freedom and visibility for formerly mar-
ginalized peoples or a doomsday fragmentation of society into minor-
ity interest groups remains a focus of contention. Lyotard himself 
stresses that the dissolution of ‘grands récits’ does not necessarily im-
ply a gloomy end-of-society scenario and the isolation of the individ-
ual. Instead he proposes a change in the nature of the individual’s rela-
tionship to the world, arguing that ‘le soi est peu, mais il n’est pas iso-
lé, il est pris dans une texture de relations plus complexe et plus mobi-
le que jamais’ (Lyotard 1979: 31).24 The implication is that society is 
increasingly composed of complex networks of individuals with mul-
tiple affiliations rather than being organised into traditional social hi-
erarchies. 
In addition to multiplicity and plurality, a preoccupation with 
identity can be identified as another clear member of the postmodern 
collection of ‘family resemblances’, seeming to penetrate all aspects 
                                                                                                                             
must be articulated in narrative form. For a discussion of this see Jameson 
(1991: xi). However, Adam Roberts points out in his study of Jameson, 
Jameson’s own viewpoint depends on the over-arching master narrative of 
Marxism in order to make sense (Roberts 2000: 116). It remains clear, how-
ever, that Lyotard’s argument has constituted one of the most significant con-
tributions to the debate so far.  
24 
In fact, Terry Eagleton suggests that we should be more critical of postmod-
ernism’s claims to genuine social diversity and plurality. He tells us: ‘for all 
its talk of difference, plurality, heterogeneity, postmodern theory often oper-
ates with quite rigid binary oppositions, with “difference”, “plurality” and al-
lied terms lined up bravely on one side of the theoretical fence as unequivo-
cally positive, and whatever their antithesis might be (unity, identity, totality, 
universality) ranged balefully on the other’ (Eagleton 1996: 25-26).

Space and Literature 
38 
of postmodern societies. Just as singular, universal truths are discred-
ited in favour of multiple points of view in postmodernism, the hu-
manist notion of the unified, singular subject is also undermined. Con-
stant features of attempts to explain postmodern identity suggest a 
shift away from the notion of identity as stable, fixed and singular. In-
stead, identity is increasingly argued to be a shifting and fragmentary 
phenomenon, best characterised as an always-incomplete process 
rather than a finished outcome. Moreover, whereas identity used to be 
seen as grounded in an irreducible essence, postmodern thought em-
phasises the significance of the social and historical context in which 
each identity is formed. In fact, some postmodern thought goes as far 
as to argue identity to be ‘situationally enacted’, engendering argu-
ments about the extent to which identity can be seen as physically per-
formed. These features of the postmodern debate all convey that iden-
tity is increasingly recognised to be a complex, plural composite 
rather than an essence.25  
It is certainly clear that at the level of the individual and at that 
of society in general, the erosion of unifying meta-narratives and their 
replacement by plurality and fragmentation has resulted in new ways 
of understanding identity. It is important to note that these changes in 
identity are not neutral for the individuals involved, but are continu-
ally associated with feelings of disorientation and confusion. In order 
to describe this state, schizophrenia is often evoked.26 The cipher is 
particularly resonant due to its apparent status as the opposite of para-
noia, the illness most associated with Modernism (Roberts 2000: 123). 
As Jameson argues, ‘this shift in the dynamics of cultural pathology 
can be characterised as one in which the alienation of the subject is 
displaced by the fragmentation of the subject’ (Jameson 1984: 63). 
                                                           
25 
For a discussion of identity as process see Keith and Pile (1996: 28). For a 
discussion of the move away from essentialist views of identity, see Keith and 
Pile (1996: 35). For a discussion of the situationally enacted nature of identity 
see Seidman (1994: 17-18). The notion of ‘composite’ identity, this is ex-
plained by Seidman to mean that whereas in the past someone might have 
been described as ‘a man’, the same person would now be called ‘a twentieth-
century, white, middle-class American male’. See Seidman (1994: 118).  
26 
The use of the notion of schizophrenia to describe certain aspects of postmod-
ernism is widespread, although not universally approved. For relevant criti-
cisms see Parr and Philo (1995: 200).

Space and Literature 
39 
Moreover, in response to the lack of collective projects and the loss of 
certainty in society, postmodern subjects are often argued to display a 
‘waning of affect’. So, whereas Modern societies were characterised 
by feelings of alienation, anomie and solitude, in postmodernism, the 
self may be too fragmented to feel deep emotions. In such a world, 
people are said to live unthinkingly without meaning, as play replaces 
meaningful actions. Similarly, surfaces are said to take precedence 
over depth, whilst images and appearances prevail over substance in 
postmodern societies.27 The correlation between postmodern societies 
and the dominant features of contemporary capitalism is particularly 
evident here, as characteristics that are normally attributed to current 
industrial and economic trends seem also to apply to people and soci-
ety. For example, instant obsolescence, the temporary contract in eve-
rything and general sensory overload are trends that characterise both 
contemporary human relationships and the current economic climate. 
In the words of Lash and Urry, in Economies of Signs and Spaces 
(1994: 3), ‘postmodernism hyperbolically accentuates […] the dispos-
ability of subjects and objects’. 
The postmodern, then, is generally understood to represent far-
reaching changes in the fundamental premises of both society and 
identity. It is unsurprising to learn that such an influential phenome-
non is also frequently argued to have brought about considerable 
changes in academic and representational practices. For instance, 
postmodernism is often argued to undermine the binaries upon which 
previous ways of thinking relied, and to opt instead to blur boundaries 
between established categories (Lucy 1997: 40). This is evident in 
academic thought in terms of the rise of new hybrid knowledges such 
as cultural studies and queer theory that rely upon interdisciplinary 
study (Seidman 1994: 2). Niall Lucy argues that the boundaries be-
tween high and low culture are also increasingly blurred, with the re-
sult that academic study encompasses an ever more heterogeneous 
mix of knowledges (Lucy 1997: 20). In addition, features of the post-
modern such as the undermining of the singular, unified subject, as 
well as scepticism about the possibility of objective knowledge, have 
                                                           
27 
For discussions of the ‘waning of affect’, see Jameson (1984: 61-63). In rela-
tion to arguments about the prevalence of surfaces and appearances rather 
than depth and meaning in the postmodern society, the work of Jean Baudril-
lard is helpful (Baudrillard 1978). See also Lucy (1997: 39).

Space and Literature 
40 
interrogated the conventional representational practices upon which 
much academic work relies. 
In sum, there seems to be a great deal of justification for the as-
sertion that postmodernism has ignited a ‘bonfire of the certainties’ 
(Cosgrove and Domosh 1993: 28). Perhaps more condemningly, Lyo-
tard himself has argued that ‘le thème du postmodernisme se prête 
merveilleusement à l’activation de la bêtise’ (Lyotard cited in Benko 
and Strohmayer 1997: 1). However, as the above discussion has estab-
lished, whilst a great deal of confusion and contention remains, it is 
possible to identify a relatively stable body of ‘family characteristics’ 
through which to understand and mobilise the notion of the postmod-
ern. Moreover, as I signalled at the beginning of this chapter, it is clear 
that discussions of contemporary space cannot be separated from dis-
cussions of the postmodern. The following investigation of space and 
spatial experience will locate itself within a discourse of postmodern-
ism in order to indicate the view that despite the inevitable contention 
surrounding it, the notion does offer a useful purchase on some sig-
nificant trends in the contemporary world. In this discussion, ‘post-
modernism’ will be used advisedly and with full reference to the is-
sues outlined above. What, then, can be said to be the relationship be-
tween postmodernism and space? 
 
 
Postmodern Space 
 
Perhaps one of the most significant impacts that postmodernism has 
had upon space has been the radical reappraisal of critical frameworks 
for thinking about space that it has spawned. In fact, the postmodern 
impulse to question all that is entrenched and naturalised within soci-
ety has resulted in two major reassessments of space. First, the long-
established, commonsense view of space as a geometrical, neutral and 
passive arena has been undermined. This view is ably summed-up by 
the British cultural geographer Rob Shields: 
 
Failing to examine the nature of space as a cultural ‘artifact’, the 
realm of the spatial has often been assumed to be purely neutral and a-
political, conferring neither disadvantage, nor benefit to any group. 
This ‘empirical space’ is complacently understood to be fully defined 
by dimensional measurements (height, width and breadth) and by 
trigonomic description of the geometrical relationships between ob-

Space and Literature 
41 
jects, which are thought to sit in a kind of vacuum. According to this 
empirico-physics model, ‘space’ exists (even though it is a ‘nothing-
ness’) as a given. (Shields 1997: 187)  
 
Whereas in the past space was conceptualised as an empty field in and 
upon which individuals and societies could act, postmodern geogra-
phers have seized upon the notion that spaces are always imbued with 
ideological and cultural meanings (see Keith and Pile 1996: 2-3 and 
Peach 1997: 14). As such, space can no longer be understood as en-
tirely passive, but is increasingly seen to be constitutive as well as re-
flective of human actions.28 Even Jameson’s assertion that ‘space may 
be the template from which the secrets of reality are to be read’, has 
been criticised for demonstrating an overly passive view of the role of 
space as structure rather than agent (Keith and Pile 1996: 3). In addi-
tion, postmodern thought has foregrounded the realisation that the ac-
tive role that space plays in constituting identities and societies is not 
uniform, but varies across the geography of the world. Space cannot, 
therefore, be understood as a neutral, ‘level playing field’. Being lo-
cated in some spaces may be considerably less empowering than being 
in others. The postmodern view argues space to be constitutive as well 
as reflective of human actions, and to be imbued with values that may 
privilege some locations to the detriment of others. 
The second reappraisal of critical understandings of space re-
lates to the entrenched binaries that have traditionally organised West-
ern thought. Postmodern thinking has challenged most attempts to 
conceptualise the world in terms of dualisms. One such well-
established dualism is that of space and time. Over the last few dec-
ades contemporary geographers such as Doreen Massey have begun to 
question this. In her 1996 essay, ‘Politics and Space/Time’, Massey 
argues that fitting space and time into the Western system of binary 
                                                           
28 
In fact, as Doreen Massey argues in her piece ‘Politics and Space/Time’ 
(1996), the view of space as constitutive of human actions as well as reflective 
of them is the culmination of a series of distinct shifts in our understanding of 
space that have occurred during the postmodern era. Perhaps most crucial 
amongst these shifts occurred in the 1980s with the realisation that not only do 
the activities of society shape space, but the social itself is spatially con-
structed too. Indeed, it was precisely this notion that spatial and social organi-
sations are intrinsically interlinked that led Edward Soja to coin the term ‘spa-
tiality’. For a discussion of this see Massey (1996a: 141-159).

Space and Literature 
42 
thinking is not only based on a false opposition, but also encourages 
one side of the equation to be valued more than the other. According 
to Massey, a common assumption is that time is more important than 
space. She argues that this stereotype can be articulated as ‘time 
marches on but space is a kind of stasis where nothing really happens’ 
(Massey 1996a: 145). Massey goes on to argue that in this unequal bi-
nary, time is associated with the mind, reason, masculinity and pro-
gressive politics, whereas space is seen as lacking and is associated 
with the body, emotion, femininity and deadness. Clearly, such a di-
chotomy denies the radical and constitutive role of space that, as I ar-
gued above, postmodern thought has foregrounded. In order to combat 
this reductive view of such a fundamental aspect of lived experience, 
the concept of four-dimensional space-time has gained ascendancy. 
Massey explains this concept by emphasising that rather than seeing 
space and time as inevitably opposed to each other, we should recog-
nise their inextricable interdependency. She sums this up with the 
words ‘space is not static, nor time spaceless’ (Massey 1996a: 154). 
Postmodern thinking has clearly wrought important transforma-
tions in critical understandings of space. It is difficult to overestimate 
the significance of this upon the field of spatial study, an area that was 
itself formerly tarred with the same impotent brush as space itself. 
Cartography and geopolitics, for example, were seen as passive tools, 
devoid of any capacity to resist the dominant forces of global capital-
ism and colonialism however unpalatable they might be.29 There is 
clearly a more than coincidental relationship between the postmodern 
recognition that space has radical potential and the proliferation in re-
cent times of radical, counter-hegemonic branches of spatial sciences 
such as Marxist, ecological and feminist geographical movements. It 
seems that the French geographer Yves Lacoste’s notorious assertion 
that ‘la géographie, ça sert d’abord à faire la guerre’, can finally be 
laid to rest (Lacoste cited in Parker 1998: 52). Unsurprisingly some 
                                                           
29 
Edward Said, for example, highlights the importance of mapping and making-
knowable spaces in order to dominate them. Dependent upon this notion is his 
definition of imperialism as ‘an act of geographical violence through which 
virtually every space in the world is explored, charted and finally brought un-
der control’ (Karancheti 1994: 125). The original text from which this quota-
tion is taken is Edward Said. 1990. ‘Yeats and Decolonization’, Nationalism, 
Colonialism, and Literature. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press: 77.

Space and Literature 
43 
geographers have gone as far as to assert that postmodernism has 
given human geography ‘a renewed sense of mission, vindication, 
even […] pride’ (Benko and Strohmayer 1997: xiii). 
If postmodern thinking has wielded significant impacts upon 
critical perceptions of space, and upon the status of spatial sciences, 
this phenomenon leads us to a more pressing topic of enquiry. To 
what extent has the radical shift in critical perceptions of space been 
mirrored by significant changes in the nature of postmodern space it-
self? 
In fact, it is impossible to distinguish the change in critical per-
ceptions of space from changes in the nature of postmodern space it-
self. The undermining of the notion of space as a neutral, coherent and 
easily-mappable entity is inextricably interlinked with those features 
illuminated at the beginning of this chapter that characterise contem-
porary space. These include the emergence of ‘space-adjusting tech-
nologies’ and shifts in the geopolitical ordering of the spaces of the 
world. Indeed, it seems that the notion of space as no longer a simply 
geometrical and trigonomically measurable entity is more than a 
merely theoretical phenomenon. For Jameson, the spaces of postmod-
ernism are characterised by depthlessness, flatness, pastiche and frag-
mentation (Dear 1997: 58). The everyday experience of contemporary 
space is increasingly understood to be both complex and slippery. As 
Rob Shields tells us, ‘[it] is not just a question of “space” but of over-
laid “spaces” which are made up of multitudinous “places”, good and 
bad […] and are criss-crossed by directional “paths”’ (1997: 190). 
Shield’s description of multiply-coded and multi-layered contempo-
rary space corresponds with some of the fundamental characteristics 
of postmodernism that I identified in section 1.0.2 such as plurality. 
He goes on to argue that ‘all these genres of space have the effect of 
fragmenting any overall vision of the socio-cultural system of spaces 
in which we live’ (Shields 1997: 190). If, in other words, postmodern 
societies are marked by the loss of over-arching meaning systems as 
discussed in section 1.0.2, then so postmodern space is characterised 
by a similar loss of any coherent, unified overall plan. 
On a global scale, then, it is argued that postmodern space is 
characterised by the disruption of the ‘Enlightenment legacy map of 
the world’ (Peet 1998: 72). That is to say that whereas, for example, in 
colonial times the provision of infrastructure linking different spaces

Space and Literature 
44 
of the world followed a clear-cut, overt and ‘rational’ political logic, 
in the present day this is no longer the case. In postmodernism, global 
space is organised by the more slippery forces of neo-colonialism, 
postcolonialism and multinational capital. One aspect of the highly 
complex geography that results is the proliferation and intensification 
of links between capital and primary cities. Paul Smethurst, in a study 
entitled ‘There is No Place Like Home: Belonging and Placelessness 
in the Postmodern Novel’ (1997), touches on some important aspects 
of this phenomenon. He argues that ‘in this postmodern world, space 
is discontinuous and time is non-linear. The distance between all great 
cities seems very small, because they are constituted out of a homoge-
nous global space’ (Smethurst 1997: 378). Postmodern global space, 
then, is traversed by strong physical and symbolic links between the 
most powerful sites of different countries, the major cities. The result 
is a disproportionate decrease in the distance between such important 
nodes. Smethurst goes on to argue that ‘the lack of distance between 
places also suggests a lack of difference between places’. In this, 
Smethurst is referring to the homogenisation, or ‘coca-culturalisation’, 
of these places that close integration into global space brings. That is 
to say that there may be a growing resemblance between the world’s 
major cities, but a mounting disparity between major cities and the 
less urbanised areas of the national space in which they are located.30 
The provision of highly sophisticated transport technologies be-
tween certain major world cities therefore effectively decreases dis-
tance, both physical and cultural, between certain parts of the world. 
This is paralleled, however, by the much more precarious infrastruc-
tural position of many peripheral spaces. As critics have pointed out, 
traces of colonial power relations remain in evidence in some places. 
Morley, drawing upon the work of Gerardo Mosquera, highlights the 
ironic fact that ‘the best way to travel from one African country to an-
other is usually via one of the capital cities of Europe’ (Morley 2000: 
241). The distribution of transport networks subtly continues to rein-
force the ‘control’ of the former colonial powers. This is compounded 
                                                           
30 
For discussions of ‘coca-culturalisation’, see Smethurst (1997: 378). For a 
discussion of the complex phenomenon of simultaneous homogenisation and 
differentiation of particular places, see Augé (1992: 84). For a discussion 
about the highly uneven infrastructure between particular places in the world, 
see Dicken and Lloyd (1981: 46-47).

Space and Literature 
45 
by the ‘footloose’ nature of multinational capital, which is often ar-
gued to be the dominant force in the postmodern organisation of space 
and which may entail the withdrawal of investment in peripheral 
places at very short notice. The complete lack of infrastructure in 
some highly peripheral places, as well its withdrawal at short notice 
from others, exacerbates the disjuncture between ‘real’ distance and 
experienced distance. Moreover, linkages into global space may be 
unreliable and chaotic. 
In sum, on an international scale, postmodern global space 
comprises a multi-nodal network of closely linked major cities, ac-
companied by a plethora of more marginal places whose links to 
world space are unstable and shifting. It is not only the ordering of in-
ternational space that has changed in postmodern times, however. As I 
indicated at the beginning of this chapter, the greater ability of large 
numbers of individuals to travel across space has resulted in an un-
precedented degree of contact between different cultures, as well as 
increasingly complex senses of cultural affiliation. A significant result 
of this has comprised the reappraisal of the notion of nation states as 
distinct cultural and political entities located within discrete spaces. In 
The Location of Culture (1994), Homi K. Bhabha argues that ‘the very 
concepts of homogenous national cultures, the consensual or contigu-
ous transmission of historical traditions, or “organic” ethnic communi-
ties […] are in a profound process of redefinition’. He contends that 
‘pure, “ethnically cleansed”’ national identities necessarily invoke a 
process of forgetting the fragility of cultural borders and the complex 
struggles that took place in order to sustain them (Bhabha 1994: 5). As 
I have argued, it is precisely this process of forgetting that is under-
mined in postmodernism, as cultural mixing and dissonant voices are 
foregrounded. Indeed, rather than focusing upon what makes the space 
of a particular nation unique and unified, postmodern discussions of 
nationhood increasingly focus upon internal difference and borderland 
spaces of cultural contact. The multiplicity of meanings that a space 
may encompass at any time is, perhaps, related to growing awareness 
of intercultural spaces, in which heterogeneous peoples meet. Indeed, 
whereas in the past spatial identity was conceived of as something 
firmly grounded in a homogenous national or regional space, in post-
modernism there is growing focus on travel and displacement. 
Perhaps the most important theorist of the notion that postmod-
ern spatial identity is dependent upon travel is James Clifford. In a

Space and Literature 
46 
work entitled Routes: Travel and Translation in the Late Twentieth 
Century (1997), Clifford argues that postmodernity represents ‘the 
new world order of mobility, of rootless histories’ (Clifford 1997: 1 
and Clifford 1988: 5). In an attempt to move away from alienating un-
derstandings of cultures as whole and pure, Clifford stresses the im-
portance of travel and cultural contact. He asserts that ‘routes’ as well 
as the traditionally privileged ‘roots’ are important in identity forma-
tion and proposes the notion of ‘dwelling-in-travel’ to encapsulate 
this.31 Caren Kaplan’s approach to the argument that travel and 
movement are of great importance to postmodern space is deeply 
practical. In Questions of Travel: Postmodern Discourses of Displace-
ment (1996), she points out that the twentieth century has seen ‘un-
precedented numbers of refugees as people […] fled their homes to 
avoid famine, genocide, or incarceration’. She goes on to argue that 
whilst tourism may be the world’s largest growth industry, ‘the nu-
merical majority of people who move in this world do so to work or to 
survive life-threatening events’ (Kaplan 1996: 5). The role of travel 
and displacement in contemporary identity and culture formation is 
clearly more significant than might at first be realised by those privi-
leged members of the Western elite whose main experience of travel 
is recreational. Moreover, referring back to the argument that periph-
eral areas within global space may only be connected by unstable and 
unreliable links, we can agree with Kaplan’s assertion that ‘displace-
ment is not universally available or desirable for many subjects, nor is 
it evenly experienced’ (Kaplan 1996: 1). In the postmodern world, 
whilst travel may be playing a much more significant part in the for-
mation of cultures and identities, the ability to traverse space is un-
                                                           
31 
Despite the important contribution that Clifford’s ideas have made to the theo-
risation of contemporary cultures and intercultural contacts, his work has en-
gendered some criticism. Neil Smith and Cindi Katz, for instance, argue that 
Clifford’s treatment of space itself is less than enlightened (Smith and Katz 
1996: 77). In fact, whilst Clifford’s observation of the transformations 
wrought within both individual identities and cultures by travel is extremely 
useful, Smith and Katz argue that Clifford neglects to consider the way in 
which travel changes space itself. They go on to highlight the need to recog-
nise that travel impacts upon space by eroding the brittleness and rigidity of 
spatial boundaries. Their argument comes, perhaps rather teleologically, to the 
same conclusion as Clifford himself, that ‘the flow of travel not the putative 
fixity of space denotes identity’ (Smith and Katz 1996: 77).

Space and Literature 
47 
equal. Contrary to the Western stereotype of the ‘broadening’ and life 
enhancing nature of travel, movement and displacement are experi-
enced by many as deeply painful and problematic. 
Postmodern space, then, is characterised by the undermining of 
clearly demarcated nation states containing distinct peoples and ‘au-
thentic’, ‘pure’ cultures. The blurring of spatial boundaries with which 
postmodernism is associated is further evident in relation to the divi-
sion of space into public and private spheres. This division tradition-
ally has been a highly pervasive organising feature of Western life and 
comprises one of the most visible examples of spatial patterns directly 
corresponding with social values. The public/private division is ar-
gued by some to be destabilized to such an extent that the current age 
could be described as experiencing a ‘crisis of boundaries […] in pub-
lic spaces’ (Kirby 1996: 52). Evidence supporting this contention 
seems plentiful. As many theorists have pointed out, new technologi-
cal developments mean that the private space of the home is increas-
ingly penetrated by the outside world. Telecommunications, for ex-
ample, permit messages of all kinds to seep into the home at all times 
of day and night and to ‘transgress the symbolic boundaries around 
[…] the private household’ (Morley 2000: 3). Paul Virilio, the French 
architect, town planner and, more contentiously, theorist of globalisa-
tion, argues that televisions mean that ‘une téléréalite présente’ is in-
creasingly projected into people’s private spaces, filling them with 
representations of ‘other’ places and ‘other’ peoples. Virilio goes on 
to suggest that ‘l’image publique est en passe de remplacer l’espace 
publique’ (Virilio 1994: 28). That is to say that as private space is in-
creasingly suffused by public images, people have less and less desire 
to occupy genuine public space. The significance of this is stressed by 
Virilio in his argument that new technology not only blurs the distinc-
tion between private and public spheres, but results in the ‘non-
séparabilité physique du dehors et du dedans, du proche comme du 
lointain’ (Virilio 1994: 16). Postmodern space seems at all levels to be 
characterised by the undermining of categories and the porosity of 
boundaries. 
Many of the traits of postmodern space that I have outlined so 
far are particularly evident within the space of the city. Indeed, the 
Western city is often heralded as a privileged terrain upon which

Space and Literature 
48 
postmodern struggles are played out.32 For example, contemporary cit-
ies are not only highly diverse in cultural terms, but comprise highly 
complex networks of spaces that may be multi-layered and multiply-
coded. Infused with the most dynamic and innovatory forces of 
change, cities are often fragmented and shifting.33 It is unsurprising, 
then, that as Jean-Xavier Ridon tells us, ‘le sens de la ville dans sa 
globalité nous échappe de plus en plus’ (Ridon 2000: 1). Moreover, in 
the space of the Western city, there is further evidence of the blurring 
of boundaries and the undermining of categories, particularly in rela-
tion to the division of public and private spheres. As several theorists 
have highlighted, genuinely public spaces are increasingly replaced by 
privately owned shopping malls. Whilst these spaces frequently bear 
some architectural resemblance to traditional town centres, containing 
their own simulations of ‘public squares’, they are motivated by the 
interests of capital rather than social inclusion, and hence strict poli-
cies of excluding those deemed ‘undesirable’ are enforced.34 In post-
modern cities, then, despite the growing heterogeneity of cultures, 
people increasingly live in privatised spaces where they are shielded 
from dissonant opinions and the extremes of society. Similarly, there 
is considerable evidence to suggest that in postmodern cities people 
adopt a variety of strategies in order to shield themselves from en-
                                                           
32 
Richard Lehan, for example, argues that urbanism was a product of the 
Enlightenment. Moreover, according to Lehan, the city is at the very heart of 
Western culture and has been the privileged terrain of the struggles of many 
important movements such as romanticism, modernism and postmodernism. 
Indeed, as the city is so closely associated with the Enlightenment thought that 
postmodernism challenges, it is perhaps inevitable that the city should be in-
extricably bound up in contemporary struggles for meaning and dominance 
(Lehan 1998). 
33 
In a piece entitled ‘Errance et initiation dans la ville post-moderne: de la guer-
re (1970) à poisson d’or (1997) de J.M.G. Le Clézio’, Bruno Thibault argues 
that in the present age ‘l’espace urbain [est] conduit à la limite de 
l’éclatement.[…] Autrement dit, la ville post-moderne a cessé de former un 
tout organique, dans lequel chaque partie s’intègre à l’ensemble. La ville post-
moderne ne possède plus de centre fédérateur ni de schéma transcendant’ 
(Thibault 2000: 96). 
34 
In this it is proposed that the role of the public sector is shrinking and ‘post-
modern solutions rely on market-led initiatives’ (Wilson 1992a: 151). For a 
discussion of the exclusion of ‘undesirables’ see Nancy Duncan’s ‘Renegotia-
ting Gender and Sexuality in Public and Private Spaces’ (1996b: 127-129).

Space and Literature 
49 
countering the full diversity of society. According to several studies, 
including Mike Davis’s ground breaking work on North American 
gated communities, contemporary Western cities are increasingly spa-
tially segregated upon grounds of wealth and ethnicity.35 Even when 
the privileged venture into the public space of the city, there is a ten-
dency to take along the security of a cocoon of private space. As one 
urban theorist observes, ‘increasingly when they go out, they [people] 
travel in their cars, small pieces of intimate space, hurtling along the 
single-minded highway’ (Walzer 1986: 326). The overall result of 
such trends and the growing dominance of the private domain is that 
there are fewer ‘open-minded’ spaces in society and the opportunity 
for non-fearful encounters with diversity diminish. Directly interpel-
lating arguments about the ‘schizophrenic’ nature of postmodernism, 
the term ‘urban schizophrenia’ has been coined to describe the state of 
postmodern cities. This refers to the ‘contradictory coexistence [but 
not integration] of different social, cultural and economic logics 
within the same spatial structure’ (Castells cited in Knox 1987: 323). 
It is ironic, then, that at a time when plurality and diversity are in-
creasingly characteristic of space, there is a parallel increase in the 
importance of privately-owned space and a decrease in the frequency 
with which encounters with difference occur. 
The final level at which postmodernism can be seen to affect 
the experience of space is that of what Foucault termed ‘microphys-
ics’. That is to say that at the level of individual bodies the experience 
of space has undergone significant transformations in recent times. 
The literary theorist, Terry Eagleton, for example, argues that 
 
the postmodern subject, unlike its Cartesian ancestor, is one whose 
body is integral to its identity. Indeed from Bakhtin to the Body Shop, 
                                                           
35 
Marcuse, for example, argues that whereas the poor are more and more con-
demned to ‘ghettos’, the wealthy are concentrated in ‘citadels’. See Marcuse 
(1997). Also, in his vision of the archetypally postmodern city, Mike Davis 
argues that not only are the private residences of the most privileged sur-
rounded by high fences and warnings that ‘trespassers will be shot’, but ordi-
nary members of the public are increasingly excluded from the vicinity of 
such residences. With the abolition of the public space of pavements, the free 
circulation of individuals around such areas of the city is greatly inhibited 
(Davis 1984).

Space and Literature 
50 
Lyotard to Leotards, the body has become one of the most recurrent 
preoccupations of postmodern thought. (Eagleton 1996: 69) 
 
Steve Pile and Nigel Thrift express a similar view, contending that 
‘what is clear is that the body, understood as a biological entity, has 
undergone significant spatial augmentation’. They dismiss claims that 
physicality is increasingly redundant in the current age of the virtual, 
and assert instead that the body-space relationship has actually be-
come more important in recent times. The space-changing technolo-
gies that have been bound up in so many of the recent spatial trans-
formations mean, for example, that bodies can surmount the friction of 
distance increasingly freely. In addition, the availability of telecom-
munications means that bodies can also command space and act at a 
distance (Pile and Thrift 1995: 6). It seems, then, that postmodernism 
has increased the importance of the body in practical terms. In fact, as 
with so much of postmodernism, there is a clear parallel between prac-
tical changes and theoretical changes. For example, the postmodern 
impulse to question all that is deeply entrenched within society has 
encouraged a reappraisal of the notion of bodies as always already 
‘given’. As a result, there is growing recognition that bodies and 
spaces are mutually constitutive. That is to say, that, just as the body is 
shaped by the spaces it inhabits, so it plays a formative role in the 
constitution of such spaces. Heidi J. Nast encapsulates this argument 
in her assertion that ‘bodies and spaces are not discretely bounded, 
plump objects or plenitudes. Instead, corporeality and place partly 
produce the meaning and physicality of one another, making it diffi-
cult to ascertain where a body ends and a place begins’ (Nast 1998a: 
109). Bodies and places are argued to be caught up in an interdepend-
ent, mutually formative relationship. In Nast’s work with Steve Pile, 
her argument becomes particularly interesting. She tells us: 
 
It is not enough simply to treat the body-place relationship as if it was 
either universal (non-specific) or unique (too specific). Instead, the 
particular ways in which spatial relations come together to make bod-
ies and places, through the body and through places, need to be exem-
plified, demonstrated and clarified, in places, though the body. (Nast 
1998b: 5)  
 
Displaying clear adherence to postmodern thinking, Nast’s view of the 
complex body-place relationship does not rely upon some normalised 
vision of an ideal and normalised white, middle-class male body.

Space and Literature 
51 
Rather, she implies that this relationship embraces a diverse network 
of contributory factors. The postmodern body, then, is increasingly 
understood in terms of interdependencies and networks rather than bi-
nary oppositions and separate realms. 
In sum, postmodern space can be characterised as devoid of any 
over-arching plan or logical order. On the contrary, established cate-
gories are increasingly undermined and spatial boundaries eroded. The 
growing significance of travel and displacement is clear, resulting in 
cultural mixing, heterogeneity and the erosion of simple notions of na-
tion and nationhood. It seems, then, that there is considerable justifica-
tion for Paul Smethurst’s assertion that ‘postmodern place, real and 
fictional, must be more fluid, based on continuous redefinition, and 
open to multiple histories and traditions’ (Smethurst 1997: 383). 
What might be said to be the impact of these changes upon in-
dividuals? The eminent French geographer, Paul Claval, asserts that 
there is a direct link between changes in the nature of the postmodern 
world, and the increasingly urgent search for identity. In his 1995 mo-
nograph La Géographie culturelle, he argues that ‘la préoccupation 
identitaire devient obsédante dans toutes les sociétes touchées par la 
révolution des médias: une sourde inquiétude les caractérise’ (Claval 
1995: 333).36 In a world in which all dominant meaning systems are 
undermined and in which cultures and peoples are increasingly con-
fronted by difference, it is little wonder that there is a growing quest 
for identity. Jonathan Rutherford, in his 1990 study, Identity: Commu-
nity, Culture, Difference, argues that 
 
Modern life ascribes to us a multiplicity of subject positions and po-
tential identities which hold the prospects for historically unparalleled 
human development, but they also represent a predicament that threat-
ens fragmentation and psychosis – terrifying in their lack of personal, 
collective and moral boundaries. In this postmodern, ‘wide-open’ 
world our bodies are bereft of those spatial and temporal co-ordinates 
essential for historicity, for a consciousness of our own collective and 
personal past. (Rutherford 1990: 24)  
 
                                                           
36 
Moreover, as Madan Sarup points out, the word ‘identity’ was not even in-
cluded in Raymond Williams’ (1976) Keywords, and yet is now an omnipres-
ent concern. See Sarup (1994: 93-104).

Space and Literature 
52 
As a result, Rutherford concludes, a feeling of ‘not belonging’ has be-
come endemic. It is clear that the unstable and shifting nature of 
postmodern space undermines some of the ways in which identity was 
grounded in space in the past. However, does the increasingly pressing 
sense of ‘not belonging’ indicate that identities are less firmly 
grounded in space in the contemporary world? 
It is certainly true that a substantial body of theorists equate the 
growing spatial disorientation of individuals with the growing irrele-
vance of space. Paul Virilio, for example, argues that the effect of 
postmodern space is that ‘nous habiterons tous partout’ (Virilio 1994: 
50). Paul Gilroy, author of The Black Atlantic (1993) asserts that ‘in a 
world of movement, “it ain’t where you’re from, it’s where you’re at”’ 
(Gilroy cited in Pile and Thrift 1995a: 21). Iain Chambers expresses a 
similar sentiment, proposing that we should ‘abandon the fixed ge-
ometry of sites and roots’, because ‘an increasing number of people 
are making a home in homelessness, there [sic] dwelling in diasporic 
identities and heterogeneous histories’ (Chambers 1994: 246). In an 
age of increasing mobility, heterogeneous spaces and the undermining 
of simply demarcated cultural and national spaces, is it true that space 
is no longer significant in the formation of identities? 
Amidst the brouhaha of voices proclaiming universal footloose-
ness or the replacement of space by virtual environments,37 the call to 
recognise the continuing importance of place in identity formation is 
increasingly audible. Linda McDowell, for example, argues that it is 
important not to forget ‘permanence, solidity, meaning and symbol-
ism, what we might refer to as attachment to place’ (McDowell 1996: 
32). Madan Sarup endorses this argument, telling us that ‘like so many 
others, I am pre-occupied by ideas of home, displacement, memory 
and loss’. He goes on to argue that ‘millions of people in the world to-
day are searching for “roots”, they go back to the town, the country or 
the continent they came from long ago’ (Sarup 1994: 93-95). So, de-
spite the emphasis in much contemporary academic enquiry on travel 
and ‘routes’ rather than ‘roots’, notions of home and belonging remain 
highly relevant. People may increasingly speak from in-between cul-
tures, nations and languages but the desire for a place of belonging 
                                                           
37 
Ken Hillis, for example, questions whether in an age of chat rooms and virtual 
environments the body still matters (Hillis 1998: 52).

Space and Literature 
53 
remains strong. Clearly, as my discussion has already demonstrated, 
the foundations that traditionally underpinned senses of spatial be-
longing have been undermined by the destabilization of coherent na-
tional boundaries and culturally homogenous spaces. In addition, the 
division between private and public space is more and more porous. It 
seems that there is a great deal of justification for Pile and Thrift’s call 
for a ‘refiguring of notions of “home” and “nation”’ (Pile and Thrift 
1995a: 18) in the contemporary age. 
Having examined in detail the arguments of those such as 
Jameson that space has changed in terms of both characteristics and 
critical perception, I have argued that the plural, shifting and multi-
layered spaces of the contemporary world remain deeply significant in 
the formation of both individual identities and societies. In fact, it 
seems that one of the most significant results of transformations in the 
experience of contemporary space is the growing prevalence of an ur-
gent search for home space and cultural belonging. This search will 
represent the focus of my investigation of the life writing texts of 
Guibert, Doubrovsky and Robin in chapters 3, 4, 5 and 6 of this work. 
In order to establish a rigorous theoretical framework for my discus-
sions of these literary works, it is to an interrogation of how notions of 
‘home’ and belonging can be understood in the shifting, fast-changing 
spaces of postmodernism that my discussion will now turn. 
 
 
Home Space and Cultural Belonging in the Postmodern World 
 
The importance of home has long been established. In his Interpreta-
tion of Dreams, Freud, for example, equated the house with the self.38 
Similarly, the close association of the house and the self plays an im-
portant role in Gaston Bachelard’s La Poétique de l’espace (1974). In 
this, he proposes that ‘l’image de la maison’ represents “la topog-
raphie de notre être intime” and suggests that the house could function 
as ‘un instrument d’analyse pour l’âme humaine’ (Bachelard 1974: 
18-19). He argues that it is through attachment to ‘la maison’ that we 
                                                           
38 
See Apter (1998: 119). See also Rosemary Marangoly George for discussion 
of other theorists who have developed similar arguments, particularly Carl 
Jung, and the pitfalls of associating the sophistication of a home with a person 
(Marangoly George 1999: 19).

Space and Literature 
54 
root ourselves into a certain place in the world, and goes on to assert 
that ‘la maison, dans la vie de l’homme, évince des contingences, elle 
multiplie ses conseils de continuité. Sans elle, l’homme serait un être 
dispersé’ (Bachelard 1974: 26). From this we can infer Bachelard’s 
belief in the strength of a person’s symbolic or affective investment in 
‘la maison’, and the importance of this in forging a stable and rooted 
identity. This conception of ‘la maison’, however, is not used by 
Bachelard to apply to every building that comprises somebody’s pri-
mary residence. He comments disparagingly upon the ‘boîtes superpo-
sées’ that take the place of proper ‘maisons’ in big cities, and seems to 
discount them from any proper classification of home. In fact, Bache-
lard’s notion of home relies upon a highly idealised vision of a house 
that is sizeable enough to contain ‘une cave’, ‘un grenier’ and ‘un jar-
din’.39 
In the preface to an anthology of Irish writers’ literary articula-
tions of home, the president of an anti-homelessness organisation, 
Stanislaus Kennedy, expresses a similarly unequivocal view of the 
importance of home. He asserts that ‘everyone has a right to a place 
called home’ and goes on to argue that home is associated with safety, 
security, dignity and respect. The impacts of homelessness, according 
to Kennedy, are devastating because ‘being without a home is being 
without that place in which to be oneself, at ease, secure and at rest. 
The need for a place like that is deep and urgent in all of us’ (Kennedy 
1996: vii-viii). Unlike Bachelard, however, Kennedy does not sketch 
out a clear definition of the home. On the contrary, he confesses that 
the concept of ‘home’ is highly elusive and difficult to define. Despite 
this, there is a clear convergence in the work of both Bachelard and 
Kennedy in terms of what they perceive to be essential characteristics 
of home. From the writings of both we can draw the sense that any no-
tion of ‘home’ depends upon a complex mesh of material, social and 
emotional factors. Both Bachelard and Kennedy envisage home to be 
a physical place in which a person makes a considerable emotional in-
vestment. This view is supported by Witold Rybczynski in a work en-
titled Home: A Short History of an Idea (1986). Rybczynski proposes 
that throughout history, the notion of ‘home’ has brought together the 
                                                           
39 
For mentions of the ‘cave’ and the ‘grenier’ see Bachelard (1974: 35), and for 
the ‘jardin’ see Bachelard (1974: 95 and 98).

Space and Literature 
55 
meanings of house and household, ‘of dwelling and of refuge, of own-
ership and of affection’. He goes on to affirm that since its conception, 
the notion of ‘“home” meant the house but also everything that was in 
it and around it, as well as the people and the sense of satisfaction and 
contentment that all these conveyed’ (Rybczynski 1986: 62). From 
these diverse works, then, a common understanding of home can be 
inferred: home comprises an emotional investment in a particular ma-
terial space. 
In fact, Rybczynski’s work adds greater depth to the discussion 
as he suggests that the notion of ‘home’ is both historically and cultur-
ally specific. He writes, for example, that whilst German, Danish, 
Swedish, Icelandic, Dutch and English all have similar sounding 
words for ‘home’, derived from the Old Norse ‘heima’, there is no 
equivalent word in Latin or Slavic European languages (Rybczynski 
1986: 62). In practical terms, it is clear that the concept of ‘home’ is 
inextricably interlinked with cultural value systems and social power 
relations.40 A return to the work of Bachelard, and the rather bourgeois 
definition of home that he proffers, neatly illustrates this argument. 
From Bachelard’s work we might infer that the long-term inhabitation 
of a house that is large enough to contain a cellar, a loft and a garden 
is an almost universal experience. This assumption relies, however, 
upon the unsubstantiated and culturally specific myth that the world is 
full of affluent private homeowners. Moreover, Bachelard further de-
nies the diversity of experiences of home in his unequivocal invest-
ment of the house with positive values. He talks of ‘des espaces 
louangés’ and ‘l’espace heureux’, and chooses ‘le nom de topophilie’ 
to characterise his overall project (Bachelard 1974: 17). This idealisa-
tion ignores the fact that whilst home space may be something that the 
majority of people search for and desire, it is also sometimes the site 
of conflict, abuse and struggle.41 
                                                           
40 
For further discussion of the culturally specific nature of home see Marangoly 
George (1999: 17). 
41 
Nancy Duncan argues, for example, that homes are often the site of invisible 
violence because they are firmly relegated to the private realm (Duncan 
1996b: 132). A literary example that is cited by the literary theorist Andrew 
Thacker to support the argument that home spaces are not always character-
ised by intimacy and warmth is that of The Yellow Wallpaper (Thacker 2003: 
16).

Space and Literature 
56 
Perhaps most seriously of all, however, the clear cultural and 
historical specificity of Bachelard’s work is highlighted by his asser-
tion that women build the insides of homes whereas men build the 
outside (Bachelard 1974: 74). This view exemplifies the gender as-
sumptions with which home space has traditionally been inflected. 
Chris Barker, author of Cultural Studies: Theory and Practice (2000), 
asserts that ‘homes have been cast as the unpaid domain of mothers 
and children, connoting the secondary values of caring, love, tender-
ness and domesticity’ (Barker 2000: 293). It is perhaps for this reason 
that the study of home has been relatively neglected: homes are on one 
hand connoted with ‘secondary values’, and on the other hand are of-
ten identified by feminists as the site of women’s oppression. How-
ever unpalatable such connotations may be, it is clear that the study of 
home should not be abandoned (McElroy 1997: 285). Indeed, Bache-
lard’s work seems the ideal example with which to shore up one theo-
rist’s pertinent observation that 
 
Home and language tend to be taken for granted; like Mother or 
Woman, they are often naturalized and homogenized. The source be-
comes then an illusory, secure and fixed place, invoked as a natural 
state of things untainted by any process or outside influence […], or 
else, as an indisputable point of reference on whose authority one can 
unfailingly rely. (Minh-ha 1994: 14) 
 
In a postmodern age when migration, exile and travel as well as dislo-
cation and displacement are widespread, such ‘naturalized’ notions of 
home are applicable only to a privileged minority. 
Furthermore, in the contemporary world of movement and dis-
placement the search for home is complicated by the speed at which 
the world is changing and at which traditional places of belonging are 
being eroded. As Caren Kaplan observes: 
 
For many of us there is no possibility of staying at home in the con-
ventional sense – that is, the world has changed to the point that those 
domestic, national or marked spaces no longer exist. […] There is not 
necessarily a preoriginary space in which to stay after modern imperi-
alist expansion. (Kaplan 1996: 7) 
 
In fact, the problem of establishing home space in the postmodern 
world is perhaps more complex than may at first be realised. Inter-
linked with this search for a personal space of emotional investment

Space and Literature 
57 
that can be labelled ‘home’ is often a desire to establish a sense of be-
longing in cultural or national space. This is reflected in the fact that 
James Clifford extensively discusses the notion of ‘homelands’. He 
defines these sites as ‘safe spaces where the traffic across borders can 
be controlled’ (Clifford 1997: 7). As I argued above, a characteristic 
feature of the postmodern world is the transgression of boundaries and 
the erosion of homogenous cultural spaces. It seems then, that the 
prevalence of movement and the extent of cultural mixing in the con-
temporary world mean that our traditional perceptions of how to root 
ourselves into a wider sense of community may need to be refigured 
alongside the notion of ‘home’. In both cases, the assumption that a 
sense of belonging can be based upon the exclusion of difference is 
increasingly being called into question.42 
Another example of significant changes in the contemporary 
experience of home in recent times can be identified in terms of the 
practical transformations that many homes have undergone. For ex-
ample, there is considerable evidence to suggest that in the West the 
typical home is becoming more self-sufficient. Chris Barker argues 
that we increasingly live in ‘home-centred societies’ (Barker 2000: 
314-315). It is certainly highly evident that new technologies have 
significantly increased the number of activities that can be pursued 
from home, as well as the amount of information that can now be ac-
cessed from within this private space (Benko 1997a: 26). In addition, 
whereas the home has traditionally been associated with the family, 
social reproduction and recreation, Doreen Massey argues that tele-
communications mean that the home is now often invaded by work 
(Massey 1996a: 120). On a more extreme note, Virilio goes as far as 
to argue that electronic tagging means that the home can, in effect, be 
used as a prison (Virilio 1994: 70). Homes are, then, becoming both 
more self-sufficient and more multi-functional. 
It seems in sum that defining home in the postmodern world is 
highly problematic. The Barchelardian vision of a large, bourgeois 
house that is fixed in an apparently timeless space and a homogenous 
culture is clearly elitist and inadequate to describe the wide range of 
                                                           
42 
In fact, many attempts to define ‘home’ focus on the processes of inclusion 
and exclusion that the concept sometimes entails. See, for example, Maran-
goly George (1999: 2).

Space and Literature 
58 
homes that exist in the world. Moreover, the postmodern blurring of 
spatial categories means that contemporary home spaces can no longer 
be defined by the activities that take place in them, or by a simple op-
position of domestic and public spaces. Whilst spaces of home and 
cultural belonging have traditionally drawn upon nostalgic notions of 
cultural homogeneity and fixity, they can no longer be so neatly op-
posed to movement and travel. As Marc Augé has observed, increased 
cultural contact and heterogeneity mean that ‘dans le monde de la 
surmodernité on est toujours et on n’est plus jamais «chez soi»: les 
zones frontières […] n’introduisent plus jamais à des mondes totale-
ment étrangers’ (Augé 1992: 136). Indeed, just as cultures can no 
longer be understood as ‘pure’ and ‘endangered authenticities’ (Clif-
ford 1988: 5), so homes can no longer be seen as unpolluted sites of 
sameness that must be protected from all that is different. Perhaps, 
then, it is not possible to define spaces of home and cultural belonging 
in the contemporary world? 
I wish to contend that we can in fact productively understand 
home through a ‘loose’ definition that emphasises the importance of 
affective investment in one or more particular spaces of habitation. 
Chris Barker’s citation of Silverstone is particularly helpful in this, as 
he advances the theory that home is 
 
a manifestation of an investment of meaning in space. It is a claim we 
make about a place. It is constructed through social relations which 
are both internal and external and constantly shifting in their power re-
lations. (Chris Barker 2000: 293) 
 
In addition to being both culturally and historically specific as I have 
suggested, then, we can add that such home spaces are highly indi-
vidualised. Pile and Thrift, for example, suggest that home can in-
creasingly be defined as a routine set of practices, the repetition of ha-
bitual interactions and a regularly used personal name (Pile and Thrift 
1995b: 196). Although this argument does seem to neglect the impor-
tance of place in the establishment of home spaces, Pile and Thrift do 
touch upon some important points. In order to cope with the speed of 
change and the high rate of erosion of familiar landscapes, there is 
evidence to suggest that cultural belonging is increasingly established 
and places are made familiar and home-like through acts of repetition 
and ritual.

Space and Literature 
59 
An interesting development which can be seen to result in some 
way from the erosion of unified and unproblematic ‘home’ spaces is 
that of the growing importance of the body as centre of the individ-
ual’s world. Paul Virilio, for example, argues that the results of the 
erosion of ‘home’ include ‘la désorientation spatielle et temporelle, la 
brutale déconstruction de l’environnement réel. Le «haut» et le «bas» 
devenaient comme le «futur» ou le «passé» équivalents, cette soudaine 
réversabilité redonne la première place au corps comme centre, centre 
du monde environnant’ (Virilio 1994: 132). Virilio’s argument about 
the new centrality of the body as a home within space is compelling, 
although as I argued in section 1.0.3, Virilio’s perception of the de-
creasing importance of space in the contemporary world is difficult to 
sustain. With regard to the status of the body, rather than accepting the 
extremes of Virilio’s argument, it is perhaps necessary to remember 
that there is much evidence that the body and space are mutually in-
terdependent in the current age. Home and the body, may, then, be in-
extricably interlinked and mutually influential.43 
From this exploration of a diverse range of theoretical view-
points it seems that notions of home and cultural belonging are deeply 
complex. Home can be understood as an emotional investment that a 
person makes in a particular place, which may be reinforced by re-
peated, ritualised ways of being. As I have argued, notions of ‘home’ 
are both deeply personal and are inextricably bound up in cultural and 
                                                           
43 
This is yet another area in which the distinction between lived experience and 
postmodern theory is blurred. That is to say that notions of home and the body 
are not only important in everyday life, but are significant focuses of post-
modern theory. For many of the counter-hegemonic movements that postmod-
ernism has given rise to, the body is seen as the ultimate site, even home, of 
authenticity and belonging. Adrienne Rich, the North-American poet and 
feminist theorist, asserts, for example, the importance of ‘the geography clos-
est in – the body’. Grounding analysis in the materiality of the body, she be-
lieves, is a way of avoiding theorising the world in such a way that white, 
middle-class and heterosexual bodies, and standpoints, are normalised. 
Clearly, then, for many postmodern theorists, the body represents the ultimate 
home, a site of belonging for their theoretical utterances and academic selves 
as well as their private lives. The self-awareness that such a view promotes 
clearly chimes with the postmodern rejection of the long-established ‘master 
subject view’. For a discussion of Rich’s work see Yorke (1997: 97). For a 
discussion of the importance of situated knowledge generally, see Seidman 
(1994: 7-14).

Space and Literature 
60 
historical contexts. Moreover, it is clear that the speed of change in the 
postmodern world makes establishing a sense of belonging deeply 
problematic for many people. The definition of ‘home’ and ‘cultural 
belonging’ derived from this theoretical discussion must, clearly, re-
main provisional. It will be challenged and enriched later in this study 
when it is brought into dialogue with the senses of belonging articu-
lated in the writings of Guibert, Doubrovsky and Robin in chapters 3, 
4 and 5. 
 
 
Representation and Space: Mapping the Postmodern 
 
From the discussion above, it is clear that fundamental transforma-
tions have occurred in the nature of space in the last few decades. For 
example, deeply entrenched ways of belonging to space and under-
standing space have been undermined. Far from the growing redun-
dancy of space, however, I have argued that many of the uprooted and 
culturally unsettled individuals of the postmodern world are express-
ing their search for identity in spatial terms. Indeed, Jameson goes as 
far as to argue that deepening our understanding of postmodern space 
is the only way in which to overcome the bewilderment and identity 
confusion that has become so endemic in the postmodern world. As 
Michael Dear explains, according to Jameson, ‘one urgent task is to 
discover the co-ordinates of the new postmodern hyperspace, by ex-
ploring the spaces of the built environment, the mode of production, 
and culture’ (Jameson cited in Dear 1997: 63). However, the task of 
understanding the spaces of the contemporary world may be more 
problematic than it first seems. As I argued in section 1.0.2, postmod-
ernism has called into question many traditional ways of constituting 
knowledge and of understanding the world. More precisely, postmod-
ernism has called into question many of the representational practices 
through which our knowledge of the world is made coherent and is 
communicated to others. It is to the matter of postmodern representa-
tional practices, and in particular, the representation of space, that my 
discussion will now turn, in order to establish a critical framework for 
the discussion of postmodern space that will comprise the central body 
of this monograph. 
As I discussed in section 1.0.2, whereas Modernist or Enlight-
enment thought championed the ideals of objective science and ra-

Space and Literature 
61 
tional knowledge, in the postmodern world notions of the partiality 
and subjectivity of all knowledge have gained considerable credence. 
Feminist thinkers have played an important role in this, arguing that 
notions of objectivity in fact conceal Enlightenment models of the 
ideal citizen, who was white, male and middle class (Seidman 1994: 
10). Instead of such pretences to objectivity, then, there is an increas-
ingly audible call for recognition of the subjective nature of all aca-
demic enquiry and all representation. In their 1993 edited collection 
entitled Place, Culture, Representation, James Duncan and David Ley 
argue that ‘this revolt against objectivism, rationality and the meta-
narratives which have guided enquiry has been one of the central 
themes in postmodern representation’ (Duncan and Ley 1993: 7). 
Duncan and Ley go on to propose that so significant have these 
changes in postmodern representational practices been, that a ‘crisis of 
representation’ can be identified. This crisis is deemed to have ema-
nated from the field of ethnography, its influence quickly extending 
across many Arts and Social Science disciplines. Duncan and Ley tell 
us that the ‘crisis of representation’ 
 
is part of a broader attack within a number of fields upon mimesis and 
the ‘natural attitude’ which underlies it. This “natural attitude” stems 
from the philosophers of the Enlightenment, for whom language and 
imagery appeared to be perfect, transparent media through which real-
ity could be represented. (Duncan and Ley 1993b: 4) 
 
Not only has the notion of impartial, objective knowledge been un-
dermined, then, but the means through which knowledge can be ar-
ticulated has also been called into question. For example, as a result of 
post-structuralist thinking, language is no longer seen as a transparent 
medium through which the world can be represented unproblemati-
cally. On the contrary, language is now commonly recognised to be 
utterly problematic, capable of weaving unintentional meanings and 
subconscious references into any statement. Concomitant with this re-
alisation of the fallibility of language has been the realisation of the 
imperfect nature of authorial power. That is to say that if language 
does not inevitably communicate the precise intentions of the author, 
then the author cannot be seen to wield total power over his or her 
enunciations. Simple notions of textual authority have been substan-
tially destabilized in recent times. Altogether it is clear that the basic 
premises upon which knowledge formation and representation have

Space and Literature 
62 
traditionally relied are no longer universally accepted.44 What impact 
has this had upon the representation of space? 
In fact, the ‘crisis of representation’ as well as other aspects of 
postmodern thought have had a significant impact upon the discipline 
that is most caught up in attempts to represent space, that of geogra-
phy. For example, Duncan and Ley tell us that traditional geographical 
enquiry has been based upon a consensus belief ‘that we should strive 
to produce as accurate a reflection of the world as possible’ (Duncan 
and Ley 1993b: 2). However, as Duncan and Ley themselves point 
out, this view has been seriously destabilized within the discipline of 
geography in recent times. What then, are the traditional means of rep-
resenting space, and what impact has postmodern thinking had upon 
them? 
One of the longest established tools used to represent space is 
that of the map. As I indicated in section 1.0.3, by the second half of 
the twentieth century the status of cartography had already been di-
minished by its close association with the increasingly unpopular pro-
gramme of colonial expansion (Blunt and Rose 1994: 8). As two Brit-
ish geographers, Alison Blunt and Gillian Rose, argue, cartography 
has received considerable criticism for the way in which this ‘suppos-
edly scientific “space discipline” […] enhanced the possibilities for 
surveillance and facilitated imperial rule by helping to distance those 
exercising power from its consequences’ (Blunt and Rose 1994: 10). 
Most pertinent here, however, is the suggestion by Blunt and Rose 
that the establishment of distance between those in power and those 
being surveyed was achieved precisely because conventional maps 
rely on the sort of knowledge-forming and representational practices 
that postmodernism and the ‘crisis of representation’ it has brought 
about have so thoroughly called into question. For example, Blunt and 
Rose assert that ‘mapping operates in hegemonic discourses as a form 
of mimetic representation – it textually represents the gaze through 
transparent space’ (Blunt and Rose 1994: 8). In this, they are suggest-
ing that the practice of map-making is dependent upon pretensions to 
objective knowledge and transparent representation that are difficult to 
sustain in the post-crisis of representation academic climate. More-
over, they propose that mapping has traditionally relied upon the now 
                                                           
44 
For an excellent discussion of these issues see Cosgrove and Domosh (1993).

Space and Literature 
63 
discredited notion that space is empty and neutral. They tell us, for ex-
ample, that ‘maps were […] themselves colonizing spaces perceived 
as empty and uninscribed’ (Blunt and Rose 1994: 9). Just as space 
used to be seen as neutral and apolitical, then, it seems that maps were 
falsely accepted to be free of the biases of the cartographer. The con-
clusion that conventional cartographic practices have been substan-
tially destabilised by the crisis of representation seems unavoidable. 
The competence of maps to represent space in the present age is 
further undermined by the nature of postmodern space and postmod-
ern identities themselves. Blunt and Rose suggest that a ‘more com-
plex and shifting notion of both space and subject positionality un-
dermine[s…] claims to mimetic representation’ (Blunt and Rose 1994: 
9). Clearly, if space is accepted to be multi-layered, multiply coded 
and subjectively-constructed as I argued in section 1.0.3, then singu-
lar, coherent and objective maps are inadequate. As Paul Rodaway 
tells us: 
 
The map […] offers a snapshot of the subject, an essentially dead arte-
fact of the subject as it might have appeared to an observer at some 
point in time. It suggests a stability and coherence of the “subject” 
which is not evident in the postmodern condition […] How can map-
ping the subject, in this context, be anything more than imagining, 
nostalgia and irrelevance? (Rodaway 1995: 241) 
 
It seems then, that using conventional maps to represent postmodern 
space risks neglecting the highly complex, shifting and subjective na-
ture of the contemporary world. 
It is not only cartographic practices that have been called into 
question in recent times. Writing, another highly significant tool for 
representing space, has been the subject of considerable discussion 
within the discipline of geography as a result of the ‘crisis of represen-
tation’. The work of Duncan and Ley is again helpful here. They ob-
serve that 
 
Some ethnographers have argued that cultures are composed of frag-
mented and contested codes of meaning and that ethnographers should 
acknowledge and participate in this by experimenting with writing. 
Such experimentation would further challenge the Enlightenment pro-
ject by adopting a fragmentary writing style that is purposefully am-
biguous, incomplete and open-ended. (Duncan and Ley 1993b: 7)

Space and Literature 
64 
Whilst experimentation with writing has not become highly evident 
within the discipline of geography, some examples do exist. Allan 
Pred’s essay ‘Re-presenting the Extended Present Moment of Danger: 
a meditation on hypermodernity, identity and the montage form’ (Pred 
1997: 117-138), is one such example. As the title suggests, this essay 
is entirely written in the montage form, taking on almost poetic quali-
ties that are highly unusual in such a ‘serious’ geographical text. This 
piece does seem to be successful in translating some of the ideas it 
discusses into its textual space, as for instance, the voice of the writer 
seems more visible and less authoritative than in a more convention-
ally written piece. The frequent references to other people’s words are 
less closely woven into Pred’s own analysis, standing alone without 
the introductory phrases and analytical remarks which would conven-
tionally frame them. However, it is easy to understand why this form 
of experimental writing has not been hailed by all geographers as the 
utopian tool with which to represent postmodern space. In fact, we 
could argue that Pred’s authorial control is strengthened rather than 
eliminated: whilst he does not overtly comment upon citations, he has 
selected and positioned them in order to convey his own message. 
This text is not as open to ‘other’ voices and heterogeneity as might be 
thought. Moreover, such a format might not be appropriate for readers 
not already familiar with the topic under discussion, thus failing to 
embrace the democratic and egalitarian spread of knowledge that 
postmodernism champions. 
Postmodern critiques of traditional representational practices 
seem, in sum, to have played a significant role in destabilising ac-
cepted attitudes towards cartography and writing. Perhaps of even 
greater relevance to this discussion, however, has been the emergence 
of a new movement within the discipline of geography since the 1980s 
entitled the ‘New Cultural Geography’.45 Led by Anglophone geogra-
                                                           
45 
The ‘New Cultural Geography’ is seen as a departure from ‘traditional’ cul-
tural geography’s acceptance of the possibility of mimetic, realist forms of 
representation in favour of hermeneutic approaches. In this, it is accepted that 
the observer cannot be separate from the experiment and Duncan and Ley ar-
gue ‘attention to theory which problematizes description, and to interpretation 
which queries pattern, is then an important element of what some have called 
a new cultural geography’ (Duncan and Ley 1993b: 11). Clearly, then, this 
approach rejects postmodernism’s attempts to develop ethnocentricity-free 
analysis in favour of recognising ‘the collision between the data and the inter-

Space and Literature 
65 
phers such as Dennis Cosgrove and James Duncan, this movement is 
defined and underpinned by the critical stance it takes towards tradi-
tional methods of investigating and representing space. Whilst not 
adopting particularly experimental writing practices themselves, Dun-
can and Ley’s work is radical in its overt foregrounding of the inher-
ently subjective nature of all representation. They tell us, for example, 
that ‘writing about worlds reveals as much about ourselves as it does 
about the worlds represented’ (Barnes and Duncan 1992: 3). More-
over, the ‘New Cultural Geography’ is clearly more open to alterna-
tive ways of knowing the world. For instance, rather than focusing ex-
clusively on scientific, quantitative methodologies, it increasingly em-
braces the subjective and the qualitative. Such ‘qualitative’ research 
methods regularly incorporate personal experiences and subjective in-
terviews with individuals, as well as the study of fictional cultural 
forms like drama.46 
Overall, it is clear that postmodern thought has substantially de-
stabilized extant representational practices within the field of geogra-
phy and considerable debate has been generated. Despite various ef-
forts, no ideal substitute for conventional representational practices 
has been established. In fact, in a highly interesting volume entitled 
Postmodern Cartographies: The Geographical Imagination in Con-
temporary American Culture (1998), Brian Jarvis highlights a further 
difficulty in the representation of space. He tells us that 
 
In postindustrial cartographies certain aspects of landscape and ways 
of seeing are foregrounded repeatedly. There is a remorseless stan-
dardisation of space as a consequence of the focus on totalised macro-
geographical process (the postindustrial society, the global village, the 
political economy of the sign). (Jarvis 1998: 42)  
                                                                                                                             
preter’ (Duncan and Ley 1993b: 8) and the subsequent realisation that all re-
search is ideologically, politically and geographically situated. The influence 
of the ‘New Cultural Geography’ has extended outside of the Anglophone 
academic community where it was conceived. Paul Claval, a leading French 
Geographer, writes that ‘un mouvement parallèle se développe en France dès 
le début de cette même décennie [les annees 80]’. Claval goes on to specify 
that the parallel movement in France was led by ‘A. Berque, J. Bonnemaison,  
P. Claval, J.-R. Pitte, J.-R. Trochet’ and that it was consolidated by the estab-
lishment of the journal, ‘Géographie et Cultures’ in France in 1992 (Claval 
1998: 99-109). 
46 
See, for instance, Daniels and Cosgrove (1993: 57-77).

Space and Literature 
66 
The point that Jarvis is making is pertinent: in its attempt to get to 
grips with the complexities of the contemporary world, geographical 
enquiry may have become overly focused on a few key theories to the 
neglect of the vast array of diverse individual experiences. This is 
ironic for two main reasons. First, a focus on a few key theories bears 
a striking resemblance to the very metanarratives and grand theories 
that postmodernism is supposed to undermine and reject. Second, 
there is clear neglect of the individual who is supposed to be at the 
centre of all contemporary analysis in order to avoid blind totalising 
master-subject views. How then is it possible to investigate postmod-
ern space without recourse to anachronistic representational tech-
niques and without neglecting the highly individualised stories of 
which the world is made up? 
A return to Jameson’s (1991) seminal text, Postmodernism, or 
the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism,47 reminds us that fundamental 
to his argument is the call for greater understanding of postmodern 
space. He suggests that in order to gain some degree of control over 
the fragmented and shifting postmodern landscape that we live in, it is 
necessary cognitively to map the external world. In order to do this, he 
tells us, we need new maps. This argument is developed by Brian Jar-
vis in a way that is particularly relevant to our discussion. Apparently 
concurring with postmodern suspicions of conventional maps, Jarvis 
suggests that new maps alone would not suffice. What we require, in 
fact, in order to make sense of postmodern space is an entirely new 
definition of maps. Jarvis justifies this argument by adding his own 
criticisms of conventional cartographic representation to those that I 
have already outlined. Most relevant to this discussion is his sugges-
tion that the notion of mapping which has become normalised within 
society and which postmodernism is now attacking, is in fact histori-
cally specific. That is to say that rather than being a universally rele-
vant, independently evolved best practice for representing space, the 
dominant socio-economic regime has played a significant role in the 
current definition of cartography. Jarvis stipulates that 
 
maps were not a capitalist invention, but the ones designed since the 
Renaissance were of a markedly different order: stripped of all ele-
                                                           
47 
A very useful discussion of this seminal text is to be found in Michael Dear’s 
‘Postmodern Bloodlines’ (1997: 49-66).

Space and Literature 
67 
ments of fantasy and religious significance (previously their primary 
function), devoid of any sense of the experiences involved in their 
production. (Jarvis 1998: 52) 
 
It seems, then, that the requirement for maps to incorporate only fac-
tual, visible elements of the world rather than, for example, elements 
of cultural mythology, is a relatively recent phenomenon. Nast and 
Pile offer further evidence of the former importance of ‘non-rational’ 
maps. They argue that Canadian first nations used maps that were not 
constructed on the rational spatial grids of the colonizers, but were 
evocative of the stories and dreams underlying collective perceptions 
of place (Nast and Pile 1998b: 13). 
The salient points that can be drawn from this argument are 
twofold. First, as with so many of the characteristics of postmodern-
ism, it seems that the current move away from a belief in representing 
the world in rational, logical ways is not an entirely new phenomenon. 
Second, if we accept that the values that have become normalized in 
relation to mapping are, in fact, historically and socio-economically 
specific, then the emergence of the new cultural regime of postmod-
ernism indicates the need for a radical overhaul of all aspects of map-
ping. In particular, the division of the world into fiction and fact, just 
like the separation of space into public and private spheres, may no 
longer be tenable. 
A return to the work of Brian Jarvis establishes that he believes 
that the type of maps necessary to make sense of the postmodern 
world already exist. He tells us that 
 
The dilemma facing the critic of late capitalism may not be an absence 
of maps [as Jameson argues], so much as an inadequacy in our own 
cartographic skills. I would suggest that the maps are already there, if 
we are prepared to look for them. In fact, they can be uncovered in 
precisely those postmodern art works Jameson spends much of his es-
say denouncing. (Jarvis 1998: 51) 
 
Jarvis is suggesting that the type of personalised, subjective maps that 
individuals need in order to make sense of the world exist in the form 
of contemporary art. It is a central hypothesis of this study that the life 
writing texts examined in the subsequent five chapters comprise pre-
cisely the sort of postmodern maps through which individuals repre-
sent and make sense of their experiences of postmodern space.

Space and Literature 
68 
It is relevant here to draw again upon the arguments of Steve 
Pile and Nigel Thrift. Early in the introduction to their edited collec-
tion Mapping the Subject: Geographies of Cultural Transformation 
(1995), Pile and Thrift highlight the many difficulties implicated in 
mapping the human subject. They go on to discuss the possibility of 
replacing conventional maps with a notion of ‘wayfinding’. To ex-
plain this, they cite Mathy’s definition of wayfinding as ‘visiting in 
turn all, or most, of the positions one takes to constitute the field [and 
… covering] descriptively as much of the terrain as possible, explor-
ing it on foot rather than looking down at it from an airplane’ (Mathy 
cited in Pile and Thrift, 1995: 1). The attractions of ‘wayfinding’ as 
opposed to conventional mapping are clear. ‘Wayfinding’ rejects to-
talising, static representations of the world, in favour of foregrounding 
the individually negotiated and always-changing nature of space. In 
addition, the notion of ‘wayfinding’ seems to foreground a way of 
knowing space that is mediated through the body and demonstrates the 
importance of affective, non-physical traits such as historical legacy in 
the construction of place. ‘Wayfinding’, then, certainly seems a better 
way of recognising that places consist of many elements that cannot 
be appreciated through static representations of space such as maps or 
bird’s eye photos. What Pile and Thrift perhaps neglect to consider in 
their discussion is the fact that ‘wayfinding’ is not a representational 
practice but an act. Therefore, whilst it is a highly appropriate way of 
experiencing and understanding contemporary space, it cannot consti-
tute the replacement for conventional mapping that they claim it to be. 
In L’invention du quotidian: 1. Arts de faire (1990), Michel de Cer-
teau takes this argument one step further. Demonstrating clear conver-
gence with Pile and Thrift’s arguments about wayfinding, de Certeau 
argues that ‘ordinary practitioners’ of space do not have the Godlike, 
bird’s eye perspective evident in a map, but experience space by mov-
ing though it. He tells us that ‘l’acte de marcher est au système urbain 
ce que l’énonciation (le speech act) est à la langue ou aux énoncés 
proférés’ (de Certeau 1990:148). In this, he is indicating his belief that 
the spaces of the city are brought to life by individuals moving 
through them. However, de Certeau makes one particularly crucial ob-
servation. He draws a parallel between movements around a city and 
stories. That is to say that just as public transport facilities link places 
in the city, so

Space and Literature 
69 
chaque jour [les récits…] traversent et […] organisent des lieux; ils les 
sélectionnent et les relient ensemble; ils en font des phrases et des iti-
neraries. Ce sont des parcours d’espaces. […] Tout récit est un récit de 
voyage – une pratique de l’espace. (de Certeau 1990: 170-171) 48 
 
Whilst the term ‘récit’, and its common translation into English as 
‘tale’ or ‘story’, admit some ambiguity and space for interpretation, 
the relevance of de Certeau’s argument to the discussion of life-
writing maps elaborated in what follows is paramount. Reflecting Jar-
vis’s belief that postmodern maps exist in the form of contemporary 
artworks, Pile and Thrift’s notion of ‘wayfinding’ as a down on the 
ground, personal experience of space, and de Certeau’s suggestion of 
a link between spatial experience and story telling, I will contend that 
contemporary life writing of the kind to be anatomised in this mono-
graph provides some of the most interesting and rigorous articulations 
of postmodern space to be found. This mode of autobiographical writ-
ing is inherently concerned with individual experience and therefore 
avoids any attempt at generating over-arching, totalising theories or 
proclamations. Moreover, life writing is also fundamentally concerned 
with identity, which, as I argued at the beginning of this chapter, is in-
creasingly recognised to be inextricably interlinked with space.  
The contention that life writing could comprise a valuable form 
of postmodern cartography is key to this study and will be addressed 
in more detail in section 1.2 of this chapter, as well as in chapters 2 
and 6. Further, in order to establish the precise niche into which this 
monograph will fit, I will now briefly examine the nature of extant in-
terdisciplinary contacts between geography and literary studies. Hav-
ing unpicked the theoretical premises upon which such contacts relied, 
I will then establish the methodological basis upon which my exami-
nation of literary constructions of space in the main body of this study 
will rest. 
 
 
                                                           
48 
De Certeau’s use of ‘récit’ is often translated into English as ‘story’. Thus, 
one translation reads: ‘[stories] traverse and organise places; they select and 
link them together; they make sentences and itineraries out of them. They are 
spatial trajectories. […] Every story is a travel story.’ (de Certeau 1988: 115)

Space and Literature 
70 
1.1 Interdisciplinarity: The Space Between Geography and Literature 
 
As the British Cultural Geographers Trevor J. Barnes and James Dun-
can point out in their groundbreaking volume entitled Writing Worlds: 
Discourse, Text and Metaphor in the Representation of Landscape 
(1992), the meaning of geography is literally ‘earth writing’ (Barnes 
and Duncan 1992: 1). However, prior to the advent of the New Cul-
tural Geography, writing, and more specifically literature, have not 
traditionally numbered amongst the discipline of geography’s key 
concerns. Why, then, has literature historically played such a small 
part in geographical enquiry? 
Marc Brosseau’s (1996) monograph entitled Des romans-géo-
grapes represents a particularly rigorous and enlightening recent study 
of the relationship between geography and literary studies. Here, 
Brosseau argues that some of the earliest calls for geographers to pay 
greater attention to literature occurred as far back as the beginning of 
the twentieth century (Brosseau 1996: 25). These calls did not, how-
ever, spark off any substantial movement, largely due to the domi-
nance of the belief in scientific rigour and objectivity in geographical 
enquiry. The ironic lack of emphasis on writing in the very discipline 
known as ‘earth writing’ can, then, be traced back to a traditional op-
position between literature and reality. In this, literature was slotted 
cleanly into the compartment of the imaginary and the arts, and was 
therefore credited with having little contribution to make to the study 
of ‘reality’. As Marc Brosseau goes on to argue, the belief in science 
and objectivity became more deeply entrenched in the discipline of 
geography after the Second World War. At this time, geography was 
suffering from its close association with the increasingly politically 
unpalatable movements of colonialism and nationalism. In its search 
for a new direction through which to regain its status, the discipline 
turned towards the redemptive powers of science, aligning itself with 
the rational and ‘objective’ disciplines of biology, geology and envi-
ronmental planning. Whilst the human geography that might have 
been more interested in studying literature did not wither away com-
pletely, its focus, too, became predominantly preoccupied with the 
‘objective’, the ‘rational’ and what has rather harshly been termed ‘the 
mindless statistic’ (Dicken and Lloyd 1981: 1). 
Brosseau goes on to point out that it was not until currents of 
thinking rippling out from post-structuralist debate began to infuse

Space and Literature 
71 
Geographical concerns in the late 1960s and early 1970s that the po-
tential contributions of literature and other non-statistical investiga-
tions of the world began to be recognised. In 1972, the International 
Geographical Union recognised the potential importance of ‘des ro-
mans régionaux pour l’enseignement de la discipline’. In 1974 the As-
sociation of American Geographers began an investigation into depic-
tions of landscape in literature (Brosseau 1996: 27). In fact, whilst 
both of these ventures spearheaded a school of literary study that 
would become relatively well-established within geography, neither 
demonstrated any attempt to redefine radically the ways of knowing 
the world employed by geographers. Instead, their preoccupations 
with descriptions of landscape and ‘regional’ novels indicated a desire 
to draw upon literary writers’ superior capacities to convey ‘senses of 
place’. Adding these descriptions to the geographer’s factual analysis 
of ‘reality’, it was felt, might capture the ‘real essence’ of place. In 
fact, Brosseau argues that a more significant development occurred 
five years later. He tells us that ‘enfin en 1979, l’Institut des géogra-
phes britanniques consacrait une de ses rencontres annuelles aux rap-
ports généraux entre la géographie et la littérature. Le mouvement 
était désormais bien lancé’ (Brosseau 1996: 27). As I argued above, 
the emergence of the ‘New Cultural Geography’ certainly demon-
strated a growing openness to literary study within the discipline of 
geography. However, what concrete examples of the work of geogra-
phers focusing on literature can be identified? 
In fact, in addition to the comprehensive discussion of literary 
study within geography that it includes, Brosseau’s own Des romans-
géographes constitutes one of the most sophisticated examples of lit-
erary analysis from within the discipline of geography. Brosseau’s 
work is exceptional in the depth of understanding of both disciplines 
that it demonstrates. Arguing that most Geographical analyses of lit-
erature have focused on the nineteenth-century realist novel, and in 
particular on those works judged to be particularly successful in con-
veying verifiable facts and realistic senses of place, Brosseau instead 
turns to the less widely studied field of twentieth-century literature. 
He examines a range of texts, and touches upon such unusual geo-
graphical phenomena as ‘smellscapes’. Moreover, rather than simply 
translating ideas from one discipline to the other, Brosseau calls for 
the creation of dialogue between geography and literature. He argues 
that ‘l’intérêt d’une relation dialogique réside dans sa volonté de re-

Space and Literature 
72 
connaître l’autre en tant qu’autre, c’est-à-dire le refus de le transfor-
mer en objet, de l’homologuer’ (Brosseau 1996: 56). The creation of 
the genuine dialogue that Brosseau calls for aims, in short, to avoid 
superficial, self-validating interdisciplinary contacts. Such contacts 
might transpire when, for instance, a geographer seeks a literary ex-
ample with which to ‘prove’ a geographical argument whilst ignoring 
any aspects of the work that do not fit with the hypothesis in question. 
Brosseau argues that the simple translation of ideas from one disci-
pline to another is impossible because ‘ce qu’exprime une oeuvre ne 
peut pas être paraphrasé. Sinon, cela reviendrait à dire que le roman, 
ou la littérature en général, ne fait qu’exprimer autrement la même 
chose que les sciences humaines’ (Brosseau 1996: 56). Brosseau him-
self recognises that literature has ‘sa propre façon de “faire” de la 
géographie, ou du moins, d’écrire l’espace et les lieux des hommes’ 
(Brosseau 1996: 20). In this, the constitutive rather than passively 
mimetic role that literature may play in the world is recognised. In-
deed, the notion that literature can provide more than mere endorse-
ment of ‘real’ geographical hypotheses is indicated by Brosseau’s as-
sertion that studying contemporary literature could act as ‘le déto-
nateur d’une nouvelle façon de penser l‘espace’ (Brosseau 1996: 51). 
The example of Marc Brosseau’s Des roman-géographes can, then, be 
clearly seen to demonstrate a very admirable and innovative example 
of dialogue between literature and geography. It is necessary to note, 
however, that less well-informed studies persist, indicating the deep-
seated entrenchment of traditional prejudices about the roles of litera-
ture and geography. It is to one such example that my discussion will 
now turn. 
William E. Mallory and Paul Simpson-Housley’s (1987) Geog-
raphy and Literature: A Meeting of the Disciplines is, I wish to con-
tend, a key example of an interdisciplinary work that has not suc-
ceeded in shaking off some of the most obvious disciplinary stereo-
types. Whilst the very title of this edited collection of essays overtly 
indicates its intention to forge new interdisciplinary links and to fur-
ther recognition of cross-subject complementarity, it becomes clear 
that the content of the book is in many ways reductive. In the intro-
duction, the editors inform us that ‘ultimately, it is hoped, such a col-
lection can bridge the gap between the geographer’s factual descrip-
tions and the writer’s flights of imagination, hence giving the world – 
both in geographical and literary terms – a more unified shape’ (Mal-

Space and Literature 
73 
lory and Simpson-Housley 1987b: xii). It is evident from this citation 
that Mallory and Simpson-Housley’s project depends not only upon a 
rather reductive view of both geography and literature, but also upon 
one of the very binary oppositions that postmodern thought has so 
thoroughly destabilized: reality versus fiction. The suggestion that lit-
erature comprises nothing more than ‘flights of imagination’ is no eas-
ier to sustain than the argument that geography comprises ‘factual de-
scriptions of the world’. The stereotypes evident in the views of the 
editors are also identifiable in the work of other contributors. For ex-
ample, Cesar Caviedes writes that 
 
As professionals of the science of places, [geographers] must often 
recognise (with envy) the sensitivity and innate intuition with which 
literary writers extract the purest reality of a region […]. It is perhaps 
for this reason that we geographers search for those literary texts that, 
in our opinion, best convey the sense of landscape reality that we are 
trying to isolate. (Caviedes 1987: 58) 
 
Analysis of such an ideologically loaded citation could continue al-
most indefinitely. It is of paramount importance, however, to note two 
main points. First, Caviedes explicitly articulates the view that it is ac-
ceptable to draw upon literature merely when it neatly illustrates an al-
ready extant geographical hypothesis. In this way, no real dialogue is 
established and the potential influence of literature is severely re-
duced. Second, the opposition set up between professional geogra-
phers and innately intuitive literary writers is reminiscent of male/-
female, mind/body, reason/irrationality dichotomies. The effect in this 
situation is to naturalise the speaker’s own position whilst subordinat-
ing the ‘other’. A similarly stereotyped view of literature is evident in 
Kenneth Mitchell’s contribution to the volume. He tells us that ‘it is 
my conviction that literature, like all art, is ultimately a reflection and 
illustration of the landscape that produced it’ (Mitchell 1987: 23). This 
critic clearly fails to understand the constitutive role that literature 
may play in the world. Finally, it is also important to recognise the in-
herently problematic nature of Mallory and Simpson-Housley’s self-
professed aim for this volume to give the world ‘a more unified 
shape’. Nowhere in the volume is there a justification of on whose 
terms the world is to be unified, nor the implications for the repression 
of diversity that such unification might entail. Geography and Litera-
ture: A Meeting of the Disciplines certainly indicates the enduring na-

Space and Literature 
74 
ture of some of the stereotypes that have traditionally dogged interdis-
ciplinary contact between geography and literary studies. The work of 
Brosseau is, then, all the more admirable. In this study it is Brosseau’s 
aim of bringing the two disciplines into an egalitarian dialogue that I 
shall adopt as my own methodological model. 
From the perspective of literary studies, a synthesised view of 
the historical development of the relationship between literary studies 
and geography is considerably more difficult to establish. It seems that 
the incorporation of space into literary analyses has followed a con-
siderably less unified and more compartmentalised plan of develop-
ment. Pierre Jourde, a literary critic, argues that none of the major lit-
erary movements of the twentieth-century were deeply and systemati-
cally interested in ‘l’existence spatiale du livre’ (Jourde 1991: 324). In 
direct contradiction, however, Anne Chevalier asserts that ‘la littératu-
re française du vingtième siècle confère à l’espace un rôle prédomi-
nant’ (Chevalier 1997: 9). In view of such directly contradictory 
statements, I wish to contend that whilst some highly sophisticated 
analysis of space has been undertaken within literary studies, it has 
been mainly concentrated within a limited range of subject areas. 
These subject areas may be the legacy of a great thinker whose work 
continues to generate a healthy amount of interest, or they may focus 
upon areas of literature that are inherently and obviously concerned 
with space. Some key areas of literary studies in which space has rep-
resented a significant topic of investigation are summarised in what 
follows. Clearly this discussion cannot be comprehensive, but it is 
hoped that it will be a useful outline of the overall situation. 
It would, of course, be difficult to undertake any examination of 
the relationship between literature and space without considering the 
work of Walter Benjamin. During the first half of the twentieth cen-
tury, Benjamin wrote widely on a range of cities, including Moscow, 
Naples, Weimar and, most famously, Paris. According to the author of 
a study of Benjamin’s relationship with the city, Graeme Gilloch, 
Benjamin’s work was ground breaking on a theoretical level due to 
the strength with which he championed the notion of not only ‘city-as-
text’ but also ‘text-as-city’ (Gilloch 1997: 2-5). In doing this, he sug-
gested that similar intellectual tools could be used to analyse both the 
city and literature. This proposition has made a significant and endur-
ing contribution to the analysis of space and literature. As recently as 
1998, for example, Richard Lehan, in The City in Literature: An Intel-

Space and Literature 
75 
lectual and Cultural History, wrote that ‘as we move through the ma-
jor writers who constitute this study, we see that the city and its litera-
ture share textuality – that the ways of reading literary texts are analo-
gous to the ways urban historians read the city’ (Lehan 1998: 8). The 
influence of Benjamin’s work in this formulation is evident. More-
over, Benjamin’s interest in nineteenth-century Parisian arcades has 
also been of enduring significance. In this, Benjamin’s focus on the 
literary articulations of city spaces, particularly in the work of Baude-
laire, sowed rich seeds that have continued to be nurtured by scholars 
in a range of disciplines.49 The notion of the ‘flâneur’, for example, 
has been the subject of considerable interdisciplinary interest, as dem-
onstrated by Keith Tester’s edited collection entitled The Flâneur 
(1994). Also drawing deeply upon both the notion of the flâneur and 
upon the interdependency of the city and text is Deborah Parsons’s re-
cent monograph entitled Streetwalking the Metropolis: Women, the 
City and Modernity (2000). In this, Parsons discusses Benjamin’s 
work and identifies the space of her own enquiry through analogy 
with his. That is to say that whereas the flâneur who plays such a 
prominent role in Benjamin’s reading of the city is indisputably male, 
Parsons’ project interrogates the possibility of a female flâneuse. 
Moreover, adding a productive slant to Benjamin’s argument about 
the interdependency of city and text, Parsons focuses upon the ways in 
which literature has a formative role to play in the construction of the 
city. Rather than merely highlighting the ways in which the city and 
literature might mirror each other, she contends that writing not only 
exists within the city, but produces the city in a form that is distinct 
from the urban fabric. In this, she tells us that ‘the writer adds other 
maps to the city atlas; those of social interaction but also of myth, 
memory, fantasy and desire’ (Parsons 2000: 1). 
Evidently, Benjamin’s work on the city has made a contribution 
of enduring significance to the study of space within the field of liter-
ary studies. It is also clear that some of the most significant analyses 
of space undertaken by literary theorists, as well as some of the most 
genuinely interdisciplinary studies, are evident in relation to the city. 
                                                           
49 
In fact, the analysis of space was fundamentally bound up with Benjamin’s 
own identity. As Susan Sontag argues in her introduction to Benjamin’s One 
Way Street, ‘his goal is to be a competent street-map reader who knows how 
to stray. And to locate himself with imaginary maps.’ (Sontag 1979: 7-28)

Space and Literature 
76 
The city of Paris has been a particularly significant focus of literary 
articulations of the city, a topic that will be of great relevance to the 
present study. Marcy E. Schwartz, for example, in a monograph enti-
tled Writing Paris: Urban Topographies of Desire in Contemporary 
Latin American Fiction (1999), demonstrates the international signifi-
cance of literary Paris. In this sophisticated example of literary analy-
sis of space, Schwartz argues that Paris has been important not only in 
practical terms as the physical home of flourishing literary communi-
ties, but as an imaginary site that has inspired writers all round the 
world. Schwartz’s work on Paris is, again, directly inspired by Benja-
min, as is evident in her analysis of Julio Cortazar’s fiction.50 More-
over, the work of Pierre-Marc de Biasi suggests that Paris is not only a 
site of international literary importance as Schwartz argues, but is a 
city whose identity has been bound up with literature for many centu-
ries. In an article entitled ‘La Ville comme roman’ (2000), Biasi un-
dertakes an extensive discussion of the long history of literary repre-
sentations of Paris (Biasi 2000). Perhaps one of the most important 
facets of this discussion is the description of the city as ‘Paris – pal-
impseste, toujours déjà littéraire’ (Biasi 2000). In this, Biasi is refer-
ring to the density of textual and intertextual links that surround Paris. 
This argument chimes with Parsons’ assertion that literature adds a 
further dimension to the identity of any place. The identity of Paris, 
then, described by Schwartz as ‘a transcultural literary capital’ 
(Schwartz 1999: 18), has been partly formed by literature.  
Perhaps unsurprisingly, the city of Paris has also been the focus 
of some of the most sophisticated interdisciplinary literary examina-
tions of space. Michael Sheringham’s (1996) edited collection Pari-
sian Fields is interesting not only because of the interdisciplinary 
range of contributors, but also because of the sophisticated view of 
space that it conveys. Sheringham defines Paris as a ‘semantic net-
work […] whose co-ordinates are determined by the movement of 
agents or agencies to which it plays host’ (Sheringham 1996: 3). In 
this, he clearly demonstrates understanding of the complex mesh of 
physical, cultural and individual factors that make up a city. More-
                                                           
50 
Schwartz’s analysis is clearly inspired by Benjamin. For example, in Chapter 
2, ‘The Interstices of Desire: Paris as Passageway in Julio Cortazar’s Short 
Fiction’, she dialogues overtly with Benjamin’s arcades project (Schwartz 
1999: 27-61).

Space and Literature 
77 
over, Sheringham asserts that ‘the role of the encounter with, and 
imaginative response to, urban space is ultimately to provide insights 
into the individual as much as to the city’ (Sheringham 1996: 89). 
This demonstrates awareness of the potential agency of space, as well 
as its formative role in constituting individual identities. As I argued 
in section 1.0.3, such topics have only become common currency 
within the discipline of geography in very recent times. The city, and 
in particular the city of Paris, does, then, occupy a very important po-
sition on the literary map. 
Another significant figure whose work in literary studies has 
made a lasting contribution to awareness of the importance of space is, 
of course, Gaston Bachelard. Bachelard’s La Poétique de l’espace, 
first published in 1957, has clearly played a major role in laying out 
some important foundations upon which the analysis of space within 
Literary Studies could be built. As Margaret Higonnet writes, ‘since 
Gaston Bachelard’s almost mystical reverie on the Poétique de 
l’espace (1957), with his suggestive meditations on the “feminine” 
spaces of the round tower, the closet, and the nest, the literary repre-
sentation of space has received widespread critical attention’ (Higon-
net 1994: 194). Whilst Higonnet does perhaps over-stress the extent to 
which space has become a focus of literary study, her assertion of the 
influence of Bachelard’s work would be difficult to contest. Focusing 
particularly on ‘les espaces heureux’ of poetry, Bachelard constructs a 
complex critical framework of horizontal and vertical spatial axes 
around which to analyse the spaces of literature. The enduring rele-
vance of this is evident from the frequency with which both Literary 
scholars and geographers cite this vertical-horizontal axes scheme 
fifty years after it was first developed.51 Moreover, Bachelard’s work 
is particularly noteworthy because of its emphasis upon the inade-
quacy of understanding space in solely geometrical terms. As I dis-
cussed in section 1.0.3, this is one of the most urgent claims of con-
temporary Geography. 
In fact, just like that of Benjamin, Bachelard’s work seems to be 
of ongoing importance in relation to literary studies of space. There is, 
for example, evidence of enduring interest in the interactions of space 
                                                           
51 
See, for example, Brosseau (1996: 80-83); Gascoigne (1997b: 11); Gaffney 
(1997: 90-91).

Space and Literature 
78 
and poetry. This is demonstrated by Michael Sheringham’s meditation 
in Parisian Fields on ‘City Space, Mental Space, Poetic Space: Paris 
in Breton, Benjamin and Réda’. Perhaps of more wide-reaching sig-
nificance, however, is the ‘géopoétique’ movement that has grown up 
around Kenneth White. The term ‘géopoétique’ was coined in 1978, 
and has been followed by the regular publication of the ‘Cahiers de 
Géopoétique’ as well as the organisation of several colloquia. Kenneth 
White himself, in the opening speech at the 1991 Géopoétique Collo-
quium in Nîmes, placed great emphasis upon the importance of break-
ing down the traditional divorce between nature and culture, and rec-
ognising the interdependency of the environment with la poétique 
(White 1991). Further stressing the importance of both space and lit-
erature, Bertrand Lévy, another contributor, describes the movement 
in terms of the happy convergence of like-minded geographers and 
‘hommes de lettres’. 52 Indeed, the 1991 Cahier’s impressive collec-
tion of contributions from literary specialists and geographers alike is 
worth noting. The enduring nature of this movement as well as its ad-
mirable overall aim to ‘renouveler complètement la carte mentale’ 
(White 1991: 7) mean that it is a significant area of spatial analysis 
within the discipline of literary studies. 
Manifestly, the figures of Benjamin and Bachelard continue to 
inspire work in literary studies on various topics including the space 
of the city and the relationship between poetry and natural space. In 
addition, two particularly rich and interrelated thematic areas in which 
literary theorists have engaged with space are those of postcolonialism 
and travel writing. In an essay entitled ‘The Geographics of Marginal-
ity: Place and Textuality in Simone Schwarz-Bart and Anita Desai’ 
(1994), Indira Karancheti highlights the important role that space has 
played in the very construction of the notion of ‘postcolonialism’. 
Whereas colonialism involved the physical domination of many of the 
world’s spaces, Karamcheti tells us that postcolonialism involves ‘an 
imaginative recovery of a “local place”’ (Karancheti 1994: 125). 
Moreover, as Karamcheti’s own essay demonstrates, much postcolo-
nial work has knitted together spatial and literary analysis. Indeed, 
                                                           
52 
Lévy tells us that ‘des hommes de lettres faisaient route vers le continent géo-
graphique, alors qu’au même moment, des habitants de ce continent pointaient 
leur longue-vue vers un éther poétique et métaphysique’  (Lévy 1991: 27-35).

Space and Literature 
79 
perhaps unsurprisingly in an academic field that is inherently hybrid 
and interdisciplinary, postcolonial theorists often move coherently be-
tween a diverse range of topics and focuses. The Postcolonial Studies 
Reader (1994), edited by Bill Ashcroft, Gareth Griffiths and Helen 
Tiffin, contains a broad selection of some of the most significant es-
says written in this field. Many of the pieces within the Postcolonial 
Studies Reader move cohesively between such diverse topics as repre-
sentation, geopolitics, cartography, literature and education. A sub-
stantial degree of interplay between disciplines is evident, with literary 
critics addressing geographical issues and geographers turning fre-
quently to literature as a key resource. Perhaps not insignificantly, 
three consecutive chapters are entitled ‘writing in colonial space’; 
‘naming place’ and ‘decolonizing the map’,53 demonstrating an 
awareness of the interdependency and inter-relatedness of spatial 
analysis and literature. The critical stance evident in many of the es-
says within the Postcolonial Studies Reader is typical in many areas 
of postcolonial studies.54  
Not entirely separate from postcolonial studies is the topic of 
travel writing, another area of literary studies in which sophisticated 
spatial analysis is evident. In Travellers’ Tales: Narratives of Home 
and Displacement (1994), the editors tell us that ‘the travelling narra-
tive is always a narrative of space and difference’ (Ashcroft et al. 
1994: 2). Indeed, it would be difficult to deny the fact that travel writ-
ing is inherently spatial. In recent times, travel writing has moved far 
beyond the stereotypical narratives of heroic male explorers penetrat-
ing the spaces of the unknown. Sara Mills’ Discourses of Difference 
(1991), for example, focuses upon women’s travel writing in the colo-
nial period. Mills’ work is particularly interesting in relation to her 
analysis of the power discourses underlying travel narratives, and in-
corporated into her argument is a discussion of the particular spaces 
                                                           
53 
Lee (1999: 397-401); Carter (1987: 402-406); and Huggan (1995: 407-411). 
54 
Margaret R. Higonnet and Joan Templeton’s Reconfigured Spheres: Feminist 
Explorations of Literary Space (1994), for example, is interesting in the com-
plex blend of postcolonialism and feminist analysis that it advances. Higonnet 
demonstrates sophisticated awareness of the importance of space, arguing for 
example, that ‘the spatialization of our critical categories can be productive or 
destructive. […] space does not just record gender-based assumptions and 
roles but also reinforces them’ (Higonnet 1994: 16).

Space and Literature 
80 
that are focused on in travel writing (Mills 1991: 78-84). Adrien 
Pasquali’s monograph entitled Le Tour des horizons (1994) comprises 
a helpful discussion of recent developments in travel writing. One of 
the most interesting elements of this discussion is the assertion that the 
scope of travel writing has widened considerably in recent times. That 
is to say that as the notion of exoticism has become increasingly dis-
credited, anthropologists have turned more and more to the ‘known’ 
world. Pasquali asserts that ‘les nouveaux voyageurs explorent les 
égouts de Paris, certaines banlieues, et J.-D. Urbain les désigne par 
l’expression de «voyageurs de l’interstice»’ (Pasquali 1994: 67). This 
turn to the investigation of spaces that are closer to home indicates a 
cutting edge awareness of the postmodern blurring of the spaces of 
home and away, as well as the recent realisation by ethnographers that 
familiar spaces should not be assumed to be irrelevant to academic 
study. Moreover, even when entering the potential minefield of rela-
tions with formerly colonized countries, many theorists of travel writ-
ing demonstrate highly nuanced understandings of space. In fact, the 
field of travel writing has proved particularly adept at investigating the 
spaces of cultural contact that are so prevalent in the contemporary 
world. Mary Louise Pratt’s Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Trans-
culturation (1992) is particularly noteworthy as it provides the forum 
within which the notion of cultural ‘contact zone’ is forged. This term, 
which is clearly of use to those within the field of geography as well 
as that of travel writing, is used to refer ‘to the space of colonial en-
counters, the space in which peoples geographically and historically 
separated come into contact with each other and establish ongoing re-
lations’ (Pratt 1992: 6). It seems then, that this is an example of a lit-
erary theorist who has fully realised Brosseau’s desire for a genuine 
dialogue between literature and critical discourses of space. 
Interestingly, the collaborative work, Travellers’ Tales: Narra-
tives of Home and Displacement (Robertson 1994) clearly draws the 
travel writing debate into the contemporary moment. Demonstrating 
beliefs similar to those of theorist Paul Gilroy about the increasingly 
transient nature of home, the work evokes a series of writers whose 
experiences of exile, migration and travel have sometimes led them to 
locate their sense of home and self in writing itself and it demonstrates 
a sophisticated awareness of the constitutive roles that both writing 
and space play in identity formation:

Space and Literature 
81 
Travellers’ tales do not only bring the over-there home, and the over-
here abroad. They not only bring the far away within reach, but also 
contribute […] to challenging the home and abroad/dwelling and trav-
elling dichotomy within specific actualities. At best, they speak to the 
problem of the impossibility of packaging a culture, or of defining an 
authentic cultural identity. (Minh-ha 1994: 22) 
 
Blending feminist analysis, postcolonialism, and great sensitivity to 
both geography and literary studies, this collection of edited essays ef-
fects a very positive contribution to the field of travel writing, and to 
the study of space within literary studies and to the evolution of an in-
terdisciplinary sphere where a dialogue between literature and geogra-
phy can flourish. 
Literary analyses of space are particularly evident, in sum, in 
the fields of postcolonial studies and travel writing, as well as topics 
such as the city that were spawned by the work of Benjamin and 
Bachelard. In addition, an area of literary studies concerned with 
space that I wish finally to mention takes its inspiration from conven-
tional maps. Work here is generally characterised by an attempt to as-
sess the spaces mentioned in a text in a rational manner in order to 
analyse the role they play in constructing the text’s meaning.55 Yves 
Baudelle, for example, in an essay entitled ‘Cartographie réelle et 
géographie romanesque: poétique de la transposition’ (Baudelle 
1997), undertakes an analysis of place names. He investigates the ex-
tent to which novels employ real or fictional place names and the im-
pacts of doing so. Baudelle highlights the relative frequency with 
which writers locate their text within a known region, but invent the 
specific town or village in which the action occurs in order to leave 
scope for the imagination. His conclusion, perhaps unsurprisingly, is 
that novels in general employ a mixture of real, invented and almost-
real place names. A similarly ‘rational’ analysis of literary space is to 
be found in Franco Moretti’s (1998) Atlas of the European Novel: 
1800-1900. This work begins with the pertinent assertion that ‘geog-
raphy is not an inert container, is not a box where cultural history 
“happens”, but an active force that pervades the literary field and 
                                                           
55 
To a certain extent this could be seen as fundamentally opposed to Benjamin’s 
project because, as Tom Conley points out, the notion of the flaneur is based 
upon the belief that cities are not mappable wholes, but can be understood in 
flashes and glimpses by the mobile flaneur. See Conley (1996: 72).

Space and Literature 
82 
shapes it in depth’ (Moretti 1998: 3). Moretti’s recognition of the im-
portance of space within literature is commendable, and his mono-
graph is a rigorous contribution to the field. One factor which makes 
this work slightly less well equipped for the study of the contemporary 
world, however, is his somewhat traditional analysis of conventional 
maps. In fact, he asserts that ‘a good map is worth a thousand words’ 
(Moretti 1998: 3) and does not interrogate the problematic, power-
imbued mechanics of cartography. The works of both Baudelle and 
Moretti do, then, blend spatial and literary analysis together and make 
some useful observations. They could, however, be criticised for their 
relatively unquestioning approach to the space-literature relationship. 
Both recognise the formative role that space can play in literature, but 
do not recognise the fact that literature could be constitutive of space. 
In fact, Brosseau himself specifically comments on this type of aca-
demic enquiry. He observes that whilst producing maps of the spaces 
represented in literary works might help us get to grips with the com-
plex works of those such as Balzac and Proust, ‘il faut se méfier de 
l’excès de mise en ordre, voire de mise en boîte’ (Brosseau 1996: 10). 
This assertion is one with which it is difficult to disagree. 
In addition to the sophisticated spatial analysis that exists within 
a limited range of relatively discrete areas of literary studies, a number 
of more general interdisciplinary initiatives have been undertaken in 
recent times. One such example is a collection of essays edited by Da-
vid Gascoigne entitled Le Moi et ses espaces: quelques repères identi-
taires dans la littérature française contemporaine (1997). Comprising 
essays by academics from French, Scottish and Irish Universities, this 
book demonstrates awareness of key theorists such as Bachelard and 
Foucault as well as close textual analysis. However, rather than focus-
ing upon the ‘real’, physical spaces that will be the subject of this 
study, considerable attention is paid within this volume to the space of 
the literary work. That is to say that Genette’s identification of 
‘l’espace de la représentation’ (Gifford 1997), rather than ‘l’espace 
topographique representé’ is scrutinised. This work involves some 
valuable analysis, although its focus is clearly more abstract than that 
of this monograph. A further example of an interdisciplinary explora-
tion of space and literature is Glenda Norquay and Gerry Smyth’s ed-
ited collection entitled Space and Place: The Geographies of Litera-
ture (1997). Beginning with an extensive discussion of contemporary 
geography by Linden Peach, this volume goes on to incorporate a di-

Space and Literature 
83 
verse range of literary analyses. Sophisticated awareness of major spa-
tial theorists such as Henri Lefebvre is evident in many of the book’s 
essays and an original range of topics is addressed. However, it is jus-
tified to single out one area of this work for criticism. In the conclu-
sion to the opening discussion that establishes the basis for this vol-
ume, Linden Peach argues that ‘postmodern geography […] offers an 
appropriate model with which to discuss how writing by members of 
ethnic minority groups disrupts, problematises and displaces tradi-
tional notions of Englishness’ (Peach 1997: 27). Peach’s assertion is 
indicative of an unfortunate preconception that, arguably, limits the 
success of many attempts by literary theorists to analyse space. That is 
to say that Peach is implying that ethnic minority writers’ works 
should be approached with a different body of critical theory, and in 
particular a different set of spatial theories, to those works written by 
ethnic majorities. Not only does this perpetuate notions of centre and 
periphery in a system whose complexity has clearly exceeded such 
simplistic binaries, but it also fails to recognise the fact that postmod-
ern space is marked by mobility between spaces and cultural ex-
change. It is clearly not appropriate to suggest a correlation between 
any one ethnic group and any one way of inhabiting space. 
In sum, it seems that spatial analysis is far from alien to many 
working within French Literary Studies, just as the study of literature 
by geographers is hardly without precedent. From the discussion 
above, however, it is clear that some works that seek to bring together 
the disciplines of geography and literary studies remain hindered by 
long-established stereotypes and preconceptions and insufficiently 
rigorous critical frameworks. What, then, will be the specific space of 
this monograph, located as it is at the crossing point between geogra-
phy and literature? 
 
 
1.2 Geography and Literature: The Theoretical Space of This Project 
 
This chapter has sought to establish that the present moment in time 
offers particularly rich opportunities for an interdisciplinary study of 
space and literature. As I argued at the beginning of this chapter, 
across the Arts and Social Sciences there has been a realisation in the 
last few decades that space is an extremely important component of 
everyday life, and that the reappraisal of our assumptions about space

Space and Literature 
84 
could engender new understandings of the world. In literary studies, 
this realisation, combined with the well established, albeit limited, his-
tory of interest in space spawned by those such as Benjamin and 
Bachelard, means that the potential for productive contact between lit-
erary and spatial analysis is great. Moreover, within the discipline of 
geography, as I argued above, there is considerable evidence of grow-
ing respect within the discipline of geography for qualitative and sub-
jective representations of the world, and increasing belief in the in-
adequacy of ‘rational’, ‘scientific’ methods for understanding human 
beings and human identity. Sited upon an ontological backdrop of par-
ticularly favourable conditions, what, then, will be the methodological 
approach of this study? 
In this monograph, the belief that it is necessary to move be-
yond simplistic stereotypes and understandings of the nature of both 
geography and literary studies will underpin my analyses. In particu-
lar, the traditional assumption that I discussed in section 1.1, that lit-
erature comprises imaginative ‘flights of fancy’ whereas geography is 
‘factual’ will be refuted. Instead, then, of using ‘imaginative’ literary 
examples to prove pre-existing ‘factual’ geographical hypotheses, I 
will seek to respond to Marc Brosseau’s call for a genuine dialogue 
between geography and literary studies. Artistic, subjective represen-
tations of the world not only have much to contribute to our attempts 
to understand space, but as I argued in section 1.1, they play a role in 
constituting the world’s geography. 
In this work, then, I will seek to bring the theories of space that 
I have surveyed in this chapter into dialogue with a selected range of 
life writing texts. My investigation will focus particularly upon the 
questions of home space and cultural belonging that are such pressing 
topics of concern within the postmodern world. However, this study 
will be underpinned by the belief that spatial analysis within literary 
studies should not be restricted to works that are inherently and obvi-
ously spatial. On the contrary, it will suggest that it must be recog-
nised that space is an important condition of all lived experience, all 
identity formation and hence all literature. As postmodern theory has 
demonstrated, the multi-layered and complex spaces of the contempo-
rary world can no longer be accepted as apolitical and empty. All 
space is imbued with power relations and pre-existing meanings, and 
therefore no inhabitation of space can be taken to be given and ‘natu-
ral’. Merely focusing on those writers who articulate experiences such

Space and Literature 
85 
as migration that are obviously spatial risks normalising certain ex-
periences of space and creating ‘special cases’ of others. In this vol-
ume, then, the literary works that comprise the focus of my study are 
linked by their shared generic status rather than their specific rele-
vance to home space, or any other geographical theme. Moreover, the 
particular spatial tropes analysed in relation to each author will be in-
spired by the literature itself, rather than by a pre-existing body of 
theory. In this way it is hoped to avoid merely presenting works of lit-
erature as ‘case studies’ that are used to support a pre-selected hy-
pothesis. In the same vein, it will be the works of literature themselves 
that determine the order of the following chapters, a factor which I 
will explain in more detail in section 2.5 of chapter 2. 
Choosing to study life writing, it is hoped, may prove a particu-
larly rich method of deepening our understanding of postmodern 
space. The value of these personal tales of living in the spaces of the 
world is clearly not bound up in any attempt to produce over-arching 
explanations of the present age. On the contrary, it is the individual, 
personal nature of life writing that makes it particularly relevant to 
postmodern academic enquiry. If it is accepted that a single, unified 
‘reality’ does not exist, and if the attempt to understand the lives of 
others through ‘objective’ studies is increasingly seen to be problem-
atic, then the best way to explore the world may be through the under-
standing generated by writing one’s own experience of the earth, or 
studying those who do. As I shall discuss in chapter 2, the literature 
studied makes no claim to objectivity, or to the harsh distinction of 
fiction and fact that has long beleaguered geographical enquiry. To 
what extent, then, can contemporary life writing be argued to com-
prise a form of postmodern cartography? Perhaps more importantly, 
what evidence is there to justify Brosseau’s (1996: 219) claim that ‘le 
dialogue géographie-littérature peut devenir source de renouvellement 
pour la pensée’?

2. 
Contemporary Life Writing 
 
 
In an essay entitled ‘Imaginary Homelands’, Salman Rushdie argues 
that the greatest literary achievements occur when writing takes place 
at the limits of the possible. Rushdie elucidates this argument by ex-
plaining that in his view books are most valuable ‘when they endanger 
the artist by reason of what he has, or has not, artistically dared’ 
(1991: 15). As a wide range of literary theorists have discussed, auto-
biographical writing, by its very nature, is a risky pursuit. As Rous-
seau’s Confessions testify, the récit de vie has long been grounded in 
the notion that each individual is not only unique in character and 
form, but is the sole owner of the truth of his or her own selfhood. The 
degree of personal investment involved in an attempt to encapsulate 
this truth in literary form should not be underestimated. As literary 
critics have pointed out, autobiographical writing is often undertaken 
as a result of a desire to ‘cheat’ death by definitively appropriating a 
self and a life story, and leaving a posthumously authoritative version 
of it (Robin 1993b: 79-80). Often already struggling, then, with an 
impossible desire to convince others of its exclusive veracity, the 
autobiographical endeavour is further problematised by the shared na-
ture of the life story: as Philippe Lejeune, one of the key life writing 
theorists of the twentieth century, points out ‘presque toujours la vie 
privée est une copropriété. […] Raconter sa vie privée, familiale ou 
amoureuse, sous son propre nom, c’est fatalement porter atteinte à la 
vie privée de ses proches’ (Lejeune 1986: 55). 
Life writing is a risky literary pursuit, in sum, because it fre-
quently involves an attempt to establish an authentic ‘truth’ of self-
hood, and because it may bring the author into conflict with those peo-
ple in whom he or she has made the greatest personal investment. In 
addition, in a move impelled by Freud’s narratives of the unconscious, 
it has become increasingly common for the autobiographical impulse 
to represent an attempt not merely to reveal a pre-established truth of 
self, through writing, but to actively achieve greater self-knowledge

Contemporary Life Writing 
88 
through the construction of a self-referential text. Such a search may 
involve the autobiographer in an uncomfortable confrontation with 
those parts of the self that are deeply buried, even repressed by the un-
conscious, thus endangering every aspect of the self as it may have 
been previously known. It seems, then, that life writing is an inher-
ently perilous pursuit, and therefore, following Rushdie’s criteria, it is 
particularly strongly imbued with the potential to be great literature. 
The three authors whose life writing will constitute the focus of 
this study can be said to be located at the limits of the possible, and 
thus are particularly interesting subjects of study, in two main ways. 
First, the literary oeuvres of Serge Doubrovsky, Hervé Guibert and 
Régine Robin not only belong to the inherently ‘risky’ genre of life 
writing, but display a parallel desire to raise the stakes of risk by ex-
perimenting with the conventions underpinning life writing. In par-
ticular, the life writing of each author displays a consistent and recur-
ring desire to challenge the boundaries between fact and fiction, thus 
questioning the very foundation stone of the autobiographical enter-
prise. Featuring amongst some of the most innovative and ground-
breaking examples of life writing in contemporary literature, then, the 
works of these three authors could be said to be located at the cutting 
edge of literature and at the frontiers of literary possibility. In addi-
tion, the autobiographical writings of each of these authors can be said 
to be deeply inscribed with, and perhaps even inspired by, a moment 
of profound cultural crisis. For both Serge Doubrovsky and Régine 
Robin, the life writing project is fundamentally bound up with the 
Holocaust. In Doubrovsky’s case, his extratextual experiences as a 
French Jew who lived in hiding during the Occupation can be linked 
with the troubling questions of ethnic and cultural identity that reso-
nate throughout his work. For Régine Robin, the knowledge of the 
mass slaughter of her family and ancestors in Poland during the Sec-
ond World War supersedes concerns over her own French-Jewish 
identity. The task of life writing seems to stem for Robin, in short, 
from the ineluctable void presented by the decimation of her entire 
ethnic community and linguistic heritage. For Hervé Guibert, a first 
generation AIDS writer, his work not only confronts the rampant 
prejudices generated by this crisis, but, at the time of writing, was 
bound up with an intratextually professed belief that writing might 
prolong his survival. Indeed, the late twentieth-century cultural crisis

Contemporary Life Writing 
89 
presented by AIDS seems to have become inseparably associated with 
his work. 
For each of these three writers, then, the autobiographical im-
pulse clearly turns upon something more fundamental, more person-
ally risky, than the everyday desire of the human subject to record the 
events of his or her life. The writing of each is bound up with some of 
the deepest anxieties of society, and some of the most problematic 
questions of selfhood. Little, it seems, could comply more closely 
with Rushdie’s demand for literature that pushes the limits of the pos-
sible. Moreover, moments of cultural crisis, as Max Silverman argues 
in Facing Postmodernity: Contemporary French Thought on Culture 
and Society (1999), are significant because they do not merely place 
individuals in perilous positions. On the contrary, in the upheaval and 
disruption of established cultural orders that moments of cultural crisis 
provoke, new freedom may be created in which new cultural mean-
ings and new identities may be forged. These writings, then, works 
that inscribe some of the most significant events of the twentieth cen-
tury, are particularly rich resources in this study that seeks to bring lit-
erature into dialogue with the spatial expressions and structures of cul-
ture. In the inscriptions of moments of cultural upheaval and cultural 
re-formation that these narratives of personal experience proffer, new 
understandings of space can perhaps be formulated. 
The life writings of Doubrovsky, Guibert and Robin that will 
comprise the focus of this monograph clearly offer up intriguing ave-
nues for scholarly exploration. Whilst in many ways diverse in nature 
and content, they are unified by a number of key factors. Each writer, 
whilst producing literature that clearly participates in the general cate-
gory of the autobiographical, displays a desire to experiment with the 
boundaries of fact and fiction, and hence to undermine any traditional 
generic classification. Each writer seems to struggle not only with the 
complexities of narrating a personal life story, but is also engaged in a 
wider moment of cultural crisis that pushes literature to the limits of 
personal identity and social meaning. In addition, these three writers 
are united by the relatively homogenous timeframe of their literary 
production: each began publishing in the 1970s, and has continued un-
til the end of the twentieth century or the beginning of the twenty-

Contemporary Life Writing 
90 
first.1 And, crucially to this monograph, despite juggling a complex 
range of cultural and ethnic affiliations, each of these writers was born 
in France, professes French to be their mother tongue and their pri-
mary writing language, and retains some sense of affiliation with this 
country in their literary works. 
In this chapter, I will first seek to discuss life writing, briefly 
setting it in its historical context and establishing its contemporary 
status. I will examine in detail the precise generic meaning of the term 
‘autobiography’, as well as that of a more recently coined term that 
will play a significant role in this study: autofiction. I will then move 
on to introduce in turn each of the three writers upon whose work my 
study will focus, sketching out their personal beliefs and backgrounds 
before establishing the precise generic status of the life writing texts 
upon which I will draw. 
 
 
2.1 Autobiography and Autofiction 
 
As I have briefly argued, the literary terrain of life writing provides 
compelling matter for study. It would be erroneous, however, to sug-
gest that autobiographical writing has enjoyed a history of widespread 
critical approval. On the contrary, in the earliest days of autobiogra-
phy’s conception,2 writing about the self was popularly deemed to be 
unseemly and ‘impudique’. More recently, autobiography’s close 
links to the referential have meant that it has been widely judged by 
literary critics to lack the necessary subjective qualities to attain the 
heights of literary glory. Within the academic world, the personal, 
subjective nature of autobiography was often assumed to prevent life 
                                                 
1 
This time frame clearly coincides with the period sometimes argued to be 
‘postmodern’, as I discussed in chapter 1. 
2 
In fact debate exists about whether autobiography has always existed or 
whether it is a historically specific phenomenon. Lejeune argues that in his 
view ‘l’autobiographie n’a pas toujours existé […] L’histoire de l’autobio-
graphie, telle que je l’envisageais, commençait en Europe seulement dans la 
seconde moitié du XVIIIe siècle, et j’ai pris Rousseau comme figure de père 
fondateur.’ Lejeune acknowledges that this view is fundamentally opposed to 
that of, for example, Georges Gusdorf who argues autobiography to be trace-
able back to Biblical times. See Lejeune in interview with Delon (2002: 20-
21).

Contemporary Life Writing 
91 
writing texts from playing anything more than a supporting role within 
‘rational’ disciplines such as history.3 It was not until the twentieth 
century, according to Philippe Lejeune, that autobiography ceased to 
be ‘méprisée par les gens’ (Lejeune in interview with Delon 2002: 
22). Indeed, Serge Doubrovsky, a literary theorist of some repute as 
well as a leading proponent of life writing, supports this view, descri-
bing autobiography as ‘[un] genre longtemps sous-estimé et qui, ces 
dernières années, n’a cessé d’affirmer son importance croissante, sur 
la scène internationale, tant par l’ampleur de la production littéraire 
que par la qualité des travaux critiques qu’il inspire’ (Doubrovsky 
1988: 5). It is certainly clear that there has been a substantial shift in 
the fortunes of life writing in recent times. Perhaps this could be inter-
preted as unsurprising when set against the contemporary Western 
cultural backdrop of thriving interest in the individual, as represented 
by proliferating reality television and a voyeuristic cult of the celeb-
rity. It seems, however, that the recent reappraisal of life writing has 
not occurred solely within the arena of popular culture. On the con-
trary, as Doubrovsky’s comment above indicates, the recent renais-
sance of autobiographical writing in the Western world has been 
driven by a critical reappraisal of the genre. In particular, the tradi-
tional assumption that referential writing necessarily excludes aes-
thetic beauty and literary merit has been challenged. Equally crucially, 
there has been a realisation that the field of life writing is one in which 
there is great scope for new discoveries and experimentation with 
form. In fact, Claude Burgelin, a French literary critic of some stan-
ding, has gone as far as to argue that ‘le territoire de l’autobiographie 
et de l’écriture de soi me paraît aujourd’hui le chantier le plus nova-
teur, un des domaines les plus passionnants de l’écriture contemporai-
ne’ (Burgelin 1997: 103). It seems, then, that little can be taken for 
granted within the field of life writing. How are we to characterise 
traditional notions of autobiography, and what is the current state of 
play in this changing field? 
Perhaps the most important contribution in recent times to the 
life writing debate has been that made by Philippe Lejeune. This 
French literary theorist’s extensive publications on the subject of life 
                                                 
3 
For a discussion of the failure of autobiography to be taken seriously by either 
literature or history, see Gilmore’s ‘The Mark of Autobiography: Postmodern-
ism, Autobiography, and Genre’ (Gilmore 1994b: 6).

Contemporary Life Writing 
92 
writing have included studies of the memoir and the journal intime, as 
well as, more recently, a study of internet-based forms of life writing.4 
Most significant, however, was Lejeune’s publication of Le Pacte 
autobiographique in 1975, a work that is underpinned by the question: 
‘est-il possible de définir l’autobiographie?’ (Lejeune 1975: 13). Le-
jeune answers this question affirmatively, and proceeds to define au-
tobiography as a 
 
Récit rétrospectif en prose qu’une personne réelle fait de sa propre 
existence, lorsqu’elle met l’accent sur sa vie individuelle, en particu-
lier sur l’histoire de sa personnalité. (Lejeune 1975: 14)5 
 
As delineated by Lejeune, then, conventional autobiography is charac-
terised by the attempt of a real person to tell the story of his or her life 
and personality in a prose style. This basic definition is complemented 
in Le Pacte autobiographique by the elaboration of a detailed critical 
framework through which it is possible to distinguish autobiography 
from the other genres with which it is often confused. Lejeune ex-
plains, for example, that internal analysis of a text is insufficient to 
distinguish between an autobiography and an autobiographical novel. 
The defining feature of an autobiography is the existence of a ‘pacte 
autobiographique’ in which nominal identity is established between 
the author, narrator and protagonist of the work. The autobiographical 
pact can be sealed only by an intratextual indication that the narrator 
and protagonist of the piece bear the same name as the extratextual au-
thor (Lejeune 1975: 26). According to Lejeune, this autobiographical 
pact operates as a kind of contract between author and reader, the un-
derlying, if often unarticulated, premise of which is that the writer 
commits him or herself to attempt to tell the truth as sincerely as pos-
sible. Autobiography depends, then, upon an implicit agreement be-
                                                 
4 
For Lejeune’s work on computerised and internet-based forms of life writing, 
see Lejeune (2000). For work on ‘le journal personnel’, see Lejeune (1989). 
5 
As Hélène Jaccomard points out, Lejeune’s basic definition places surpris-
ingly little emphasis upon the role of truth in autobiography, stressing instead 
the importance of a focus upon the evolution of the writer’s own personality 
through the events of the life story (Jaccomard 1993: 29).

Contemporary Life Writing 
93 
tween writer and reader, a fact that Lejeune claims increases the per-
sonal investment of both parties.6 
Lejeune’s groundbreaking work clearly establishes autobiogra-
phy as a well-defined literary genre that is circumscribed by strict ge-
neric laws and conventions, and a well-established relationship be-
tween reader and writer. How, then, is it possible to reconcile these 
characteristics with the knowledge that autobiography has been the 
basis of considerable disciplinary experimentation and innovation in 
recent times?7 
As Alex Hughes argues in Heterographies (1999), it is clear 
that even those autobiographies normally classified as conventional, 
and which therefore could be assumed to conform to Lejeune’s strict 
categorisation, often contain indications of the impossibility of the en-
terprise they are undertaking. Indeed, the notion of producing a ‘copie 
conforme’ of real life reckons without the vagaries of both ego and 
memory, a fact that has not gone unremarked by critics.8 Hughes ar-
gues that 
 
The impossibility that inheres in autobiography helps us to see why 
individual authors, seduced by the life-writing enterprise, elect to step 
outside the bounds of the autobiographical model ‘proper’, and to pur-
sue practices of self-representation that self-consciously problematize 
the factuality/ sincerity of the self-reflexive narrative a(rtefa)ct, play 
with the fiction: autobiography divide, and thereby point up what 
Serge Doubrovsky conceives as the ‘folly’ intrinsic in the writerly at-
tempt to sustain an autobiographical discourse of self- or existential 
truth. (Hughes 1999: 3) 
                                                 
6 
In fact, in his later works and comments on Le Pacte autobiographique, Le-
jeune has further stressed the importance of the relationship between writer 
and reader in relation to autobiography. He argues that, to a much greater de-
gree than in works of fiction, in autobiography the writer is asking the reader 
to believe what he/she is saying, and therefore to become complicit in his lit-
erary enterprise. In a recent interview, for example, he tells us that ‘l’homme 
qui écrit sa vie, et qui vous la livre, vous demande une reconnaissance, un qui-
tus, une approbation qui ne concerne pas seulement son texte, mais sa person-
ne et sa vie. Le lecteur est l’objet d’un demande d’amour, ou placé dans la si-
tuation d’un juré d’assisses.’ Lejeune in interview with Delon (2002: 22). 
7 
Leigh Gilmore argues that disciplinary experimentation is one of the most 
striking features of contemporary autobiographical writing (Gilmore 1994b: 
4). 
8 
See, for example, Pibarot (2001: 20-21).

Contemporary Life Writing 
94 
Whilst some autobiographers may have recognised the difficulties in-
herent in the autobiographical enterprise but continued anyway, 
Hughes suggests that others have made these problems the trigger for 
innovation within their life writing. She goes on to argue that innova-
tive life writing techniques ‘are commonly associated with postmod-
ern autobiographers […] and with women autobiographers: however 
they are certainly not exclusive to them, or exclusive to the autorefer-
ential literature of the contemporary period’ (Hughes 1999: 3). Rec-
ognition of the fundamentally flawed nature of classic autobiography 
may not, then, be exclusive to the postmodern period, but it is cer-
tainly not unrelated either, as several critics have pointed out.9 Indeed, 
a reconsideration of the characterising features of postmodernism that 
I discussed in chapter 1, indicates clear compatibility between post-
modern thinking and more experimental forms of life writing. Taking 
into account the nature of postmodernism, it is perhaps unsurprising 
that the notion of a single, lucid subject producing a ‘copie conforme’ 
of his or her life story in transparent language has become highly 
problematic in recent decades. As Leigh Gilmore points out in an es-
say entitled ‘The Mark of Autobiography’ (1994), postmodernism has 
led to the questioning of traditionally stable elements of the life story 
such as history and subjectivity (Gilmore 1994b: 4-5). Moreover, 
Gilmore goes on to argue that postmodern thought has contributed to 
the denaturalisation of the white, heterosexual male ‘ideal’ subject of 
autobiography in recent times, a hypothesis that finds great support in 
the work of postcolonial scholars such as Caren Kaplan. In ‘Resisting 
Autobiography: Out-Law Genres and Transnational Feminist Sub-
jects’ (1992), Kaplan elaborates upon the greater openness within the 
contemporary life writing arena to the stories of people previously ex-
cluded from autobiographical writing, such as those in formerly colo-
nised countries, as well as the greater acceptance of the diverse forms 
that life writing may take.10 In fact, so pervasive a trend within con-
                                                 
9 
As Doubrovsky argued as far back as 1970, ‘toute mise en question de 
l’homme met en question la littérature, et inversement’ (Doubrovsky 1970: 
53). This argument has been supported more recently by Leigh Gilmore who 
argues that ‘the rumblings of postmodernist debate have also shaken the con-
structed foundations of autobiography studies’ (Gilmore 1994b: 5). 
10 
Kaplan discusses, for example, ‘crossover’ or ‘outlaw’ life writing genres that 
are often favoured by those in former colonial countries. In many cases these 
reject the traditional, Western notion of a unique individual narrating a heroic

Contemporary Life Writing 
95 
temporary literature has autobiographical innovation proved to be in 
recent times, that the term ‘nouvelle autobiographie’ has passed into 
critical discourse.11 According to Mounir Laouyen, the editor of a spe-
cial edition of L’Esprit créateur dedicated to this very topic, new 
autobiography is marked by experimentation with ‘pacte, récit et 
mode d’énonciation’ (Laouyen 2002: 3). He goes on to argue that ‘le 
nouvel autobiographe cherche à maintenir le sens d’une vie en sus-
pens, dans un état fragmentaire, à l’abri de toute postulation totalisan-
te, car toute tentative de récapitulation est vaine’ (Laouyen 2002: 6). 
Again, the link is clear between what Laouyen identifies as typical 
within the ‘new autobiography’, in this case a rejection of totalisation, 
and the fundamental tenets of postmodernism. 
One of the most interesting and coherently theorised develop-
ments within the field of autobiography studies has been that of the 
notion of autofiction. This is a generic concept that is particularly 
relevant to this study, the term having been coined by Serge Dou-
brovsky, one of the writers to be studied, and the notion encapsulating 
precisely the type of playful experimentation with the boundaries of 
fact and fiction that is undertaken, at least some of the time, by each of 
my three writers. What, then, is meant by the term autofiction? 
The formulation autofiction, which has now passed into com-
mon usage and is present in the Larousse and Robert French dictionar-
ies, was coined in 1977 by Serge Doubrovsky upon the realisation that 
the book he was currently writing defied Lejeune’s taxonomy of liter-
ary genres, offered in Le Pacte.12 Whilst retaining an identitarian rela-
                                                                                                         
life story, in order to place the emphasis on narrating collective histories in-
stead, or may rely upon a collaborative process of inscription and authorship 
(Kaplan 1992: 115 - 138). 
11 
Robbe-Grillet coined the term ‘nouvelle autobiographie’ by analogy with the 
term ‘nouveau roman’. Taking this as the theme for a special edition of 
L’Esprit créateur of which he was the editor, Mounir Laouyen argued that ‘les 
trente dernières années furent sans conteste marquées par une grande vague de 
renouvellement du discours autobiographique’ (Laouyen 2002: 3). 
12 
As Doubrovsky himself stresses, ‘je n’ai pas du tout inventé l’autofiction. J’ai 
inventé le nom, le mot’ (see Hughes’s interview with Doubrovsky). In fact, 
the significance of this form of life writing is evident from the number of im-
portant works of French literature that can be classified as autofiction, some of 
which were written considerably earlier than Doubrovsky’s own efforts. In the 
interview cited above, Doubrovsky himself mentions works by Colette and

Contemporary Life Writing 
96 
tionship between author, narrator and protagonist as is necessary in 
classic autobiography, autofictional texts are often labelled ‘roman’, 
or bear some other mark of their partially fictitious content. The auto-
fictional pact varies significantly, then, from its autobiographical 
counterpart. Rather than professing to tell the truth as sincerely as pos-
sible, an autofiction acknowledges the fallibility of memory and the 
impossibility of truthfully recounting a life story. According to Dou-
brovsky, autofictional writing seeks to create a fictional framework 
through which to narrate biographically verifiable events. In an inter-
view with Jean-François Louette, for example, he stated that ‘l’auto-
fiction c’est une mise en scène. […] On se raconte comme on raconte 
un personnage de fiction, pour communiquer sa propre vie’ (Dou-
brovsky in interview with Louette 2000-2001: 217). The will to blur 
generic boundaries and to blend fact and fiction is, then, overtly sig-
nalled in autofiction. It should not be assumed, however, that this mix 
of the referential and the imaginary is entirely free flowing and unre-
strained. In fact, Doubrovsky imposes stringent rules upon what ex-
actly can be fictionalised in autofiction. He tells us: ‘je suis tout à fait 
opposé à la thèse de Vincent Colonna: l’autofiction consisterait à don-
ner son nom à un personnage, et à lui inventer une vie imaginaire… 
Non’ (Doubrovsky in interview with Louette 2000-2001: 217). For 
Doubrovsky, the fictional is a resource to be drawn upon primarily to 
compensate for the failings of memory, to provide a ‘mise en scène’ 
for the narration of a real life story. It is certainly not a means through 
which a writer can invent an imaginary life for him or herself. Accord-
ing to Doubrovsky, it is frequently the time frame that must be fic-
tionalised in autofiction in order to avoid creating a false impression 
of whole, unflawed memory. Unlike in classic autobiography, then, 
where the life story is typically narrated chronologically in the past 
tense, in autofiction the reader is more likely to be presented with a 
discontinuous series of present moments.13 Autofiction is summed up 
by Doubrovsky as ‘[une] fausse fiction, qui est histoire d’une vraie 
vie’ (Doubrovsky 1980: 87-97). 
                                                                                                         
Genet that dated from 1928 and 1949 respectively and which could be consid-
ered to be works of autofiction. 
13 
For a discussion of the role of the time of narration in autofiction see Serge 
Doubrovsky in interview with Contat (2001: 126) and in interview with 
Hughes.

Contemporary Life Writing 
97 
It is clear, then, that there are considerable differences between 
classic autobiography and autofiction. In fact, so significant have 
some critics deemed these differences to be, that Doubrovsky has been 
accused of being a pioneer of ‘anti-autobiography’.14 He himself refu-
ted this assertion in an interview in 1999, arguing that ‘je ne suis pas 
du tout anti-autobiographique. Ce que j’ai essayé de faire, c’est un ty-
pe différent d’autobiographie. […] Je me range parmi les sous-
catégories de l’autobiographie’ (Doubrovsky in interview with Hug-
hes). Autofiction, at least as Doubrovsky defines it, should not be con-
ceptualised as directly opposed to autobiography, but rather as one of 
autobiography’s many variations. Doubrovsky goes on to tell us that 
‘à la fin du vingtième siècle, on n’en fait plus comme on pouvait faire 
à la fin du dix-huitième’ (Doubrovsky in interview with Hughes 
1999). Autofiction, then, is seen by Doubrovsky as a late twentieth-
century form of autobiographical writing. Moreover, as Doubrovsky 
himself indicated in an interview with Michel Contat, too much stress 
should not be placed on the role of fiction in autofiction. In fact, Dou-
brovsky says ‘même les autobiographes classiques savaient qu’ils 
écrivaient de la fiction. Chez Rousseau c’est très évident: il a très bien 
vu le rôle de l’imagination, qui se substitue à la mémoire’ (Doubrovs-
ky in interview with Louette 2000-2001: 217). What is significant 
about autofiction is not the presence of fictional elements, but rather 
the overt signalling and acceptance of these elements. Unlike in clas-
sic autobiography, then, in autofiction the explicit will to fictionalise 
means that there is a definite space between the author and his or her 
intratextual self-representation. The life that is narrated in such a text 
is one that the author has consciously chosen and manipulated, and 
therefore no simple correlation can be seen between writer and main 
character in autofiction.15 
                                                 
14 
Paul John Eakin, for example, accuses Doubrovsky of having written an ‘anti-
autobiography’ in Fils, that tests the boundaries of generic definition (Eakin 
1992: 26). 
15 
It is because of this space between author and textual self-representation that 
in this study I will overly distinguish between the two. In the case of Dou-
brovsky, I shall use Doubrovsky to refer to the author and ‘Doubrovsky’ to re-
fer to his intratextual self-representation. Similarly, Guibert will signal discus-
sion of the author, and ‘Guibert’ that of author’s intratextual avatar. For 
Robin, confusion between author and characters is less likely as will become 
evident. For a discussion of the overt intention to blend referential ‘fact’ with 
fiction, see Chiantaretto (1993: 165).

Contemporary Life Writing 
98 
What, then, might be said to be the implications of sealing a life 
writing text with an autofictional rather than an autobiographical pact? 
Some highly eminent literary critics have clearly conceived of autofic-
tion as a literary endeavour that is tainted with overwhelmingly nega-
tive attributes.16 Gérard Genette, for example, has argued that autofic-
tion’s main appeal for a writer is the ease with which it allows him or 
her to prevent taking responsibility, either morally or legally, for the 
impact of the text. Doubrovsky himself directly addresses this criti-
cism in an interview with Jean-François Louette in Les Temps moder-
nes: 
 
A-t-on le droit, puisqu’on n’existe pas seul, de dévoiler la vie d’autrui, 
en racontant la sienne? Certains critiques malintentionnés ou naïfs ont 
été jusqu’à dire que l’appellation de «roman» était une ruse pour évi-
ter les poursuites judiciaires! Supposition absurde, car, roman ou pas, 
toute atteinte à la vie privée peut être sanctionnée. […]. En ce qui me 
concerne, je me suis justifié à mes propres yeux en ne m’épargnant 
pas plus que je n’ai épargné les autres. Et sans doute moins. (Dou-
brovsky in interview with Louette 2000-2001: 218) 
 
Setting aside the controversy over the moral and legal implications of 
autofiction, then, further disagreement is evident with regard to the lit-
erary implications of this form of life writing. Annie Jouan West-
lund’s work is helpful in clarifying this. As she explains, the effect of 
establishing an autofictional pact in which the fallibility of memory is 
overtly acknowledged might be to produce an ‘uneasy reader’. That is 
to say that the effect of reading an open acknowledgement that some 
elements of the narrative have been fictionalised might be to make the 
reader more defensive and critical in their treatment of the text. In re-
ality, as Westlund goes on to argue in relation specifically to one of 
Doubrovsky’s own autofictions, ‘it is more than likely […] that the 
reader will forget about the fictitious aspect of the novel as he is 
gradually led into the life of the Doubrovskys’ (Jouan-Westlund 1997: 
424). In what has been termed the ‘lure’ of autofiction, then, overt in-
tratextual acknowledgments of flawed referentiality may lull the rea-
der into a false sense of security, deferring critical judgement about 
the sincerity of the text to the author him or herself (Ireland 1993: 8). 
                                                 
16 
In fact, Doubrovsky’s autofictions have also received personal criticism from 
his nephew, Marc Weitzmann. For a discussion of this see Montremy (2002: 
62).

Contemporary Life Writing 
99 
Criticisms aside, the autobiographical sub-genre of autofiction 
remains a force to be reckoned with on the contemporary life-writing 
scene, and is one which is of key significance to the project of this 
monograph, a project that seeks to bring precisely this type of auto-
biographical writing into dialogue with contemporary spatial para-
digms. Having established the generic basis of terms such as ‘autobi-
ography’ and ‘autofiction’, it is to the three writers upon whom my 
study will focus that I will now turn. As the definition of autofiction 
has inevitably involved considerable reference to Serge Doubrovsky, 
it is to him that my discussion will turn first. 
 
 
2.2 Serge Doubrovsky 
 
Serge Doubrovsky was born in May 1928 in Paris to a French Jewish 
mother and a father of East European origin. As will already have be-
come evident, in addition to writing autofictional literature, Serge 
Doubrovsky has made a significant contribution to contemporary lit-
erary theory. After gaining his agrégation in English from L’École 
normale supérieure in Paris, it has been as a professor of French lit-
erature, most notably at the University of New York, that he has 
earned his living. Particular areas of interest for Doubrovsky have in-
cluded the works of Corneille, Racine, Proust and Sartre, upon whom 
he has continued to publish critical studies. Certainly within the 
French speaking world, however, it is for the seven volumes of liter-
ary writing that he has published since 1969 that Doubrovsky is best 
known: La Dispersion (1969); Fils (1977); Un amour de soi (1982); 
La Vie l’instant (1985); Le Livre brisé (1989); L’Après-vivre 
(1994) and Laissé pour conte (1999).17 The reaction generated by 
these works amongst members of the public and members of the liter-
ary elite alike has been striking in its diversity. The most controversial 
of Doubrovsky’s literary writings, Le Livre brisé (1989), for example, 
caused some critics to accuse Doubrovsky of being responsible for the 
death of his wife due to the brutal nature of his textual revelations 
                                                 
17 
For a list of the abbreviated titles of these works, and those of my other au-
thors, that will be used throughout this monograph, please see ‘List of Abbre-
viated Names of Primary Texts’.

Contemporary Life Writing 
100 
about her alcoholism.18 The same work, however, received extensive 
literary plaudits and was awarded the prix Médicis in 1989. The im-
pact of Doubrovsky’s work on the French literary scene should not, 
then, be underestimated. 
 
 
Doubrovsky’s Literary Motivations and Beliefs 
 
As a French Jew who experienced the brutal realities of persecution 
and occupation at first hand, it is perhaps unsurprising that Dou-
brovsky’s literary oeuvre should be irrefutably marked by the Second 
World War. Doubrovsky makes frequent reference both intra- and ex-
tratextually to the enduring impact that the war had upon him, and 
agrees that he could be classified as ‘un écrivain de la survie’.19 In a 
recent interview, Doubrovsky suggested that the war had been a de-
termining literary motivation for him. He asserted that ‘je n’aurais pas 
écrit si je n’avais pas été l’enfant des années quarante. C’est ce qui 
m’a propulsé dans l’écriture’ (Doubrovsky in interview with Contat 
2001: 125). Whilst this assertion does not probe too deeply into the 
precise reasons why the war should have had such an impact upon his 
literary production, Régine Robin suggests that two main, interrelated 
reasons can be identified. She argues that Doubrovsky is pushed to 
write both because of a sense of the miraculousness of his survival and 
because of the sense of guilt he feels at having survived in the place of 
others (Robin 1997b: 123). Robin’s analysis is supported by Dou-
brovsky’s own admission of shame at not having played a more active 
role in the war. In a recent interview he comments: ‘ce fut toujours un 
des grands manques de ma vie de n’avoir pu participer à la Seconde 
Guerre mondiale… d’avoir subi. Les mots sont une arme parfois’ 
                                                 
18 
In fact, excerpts of critical reviews of Le Livre brisé were incorporated into 
Doubrovsky’s subsequent book, L’Après-vivre (see particularly AV: 259-
265). A little later, Doubrovsky incorporated into L’Après-vivre, an account of 
his appearance on ‘Apostrophes’, which was underpinned by the presenter 
Bernard Pivot’s interrogation of whether Doubrovsky’s brutal textual revela-
tions had driven his wife to death (see AV: 300-304). 
19 
He tells us, for example: ‘je n’en suis jamais sorti, des années quarante’. See 
interview with Louette (2000-2001: 213). In a different interview, Dou-
brovsky agrees with Michel Contat’s suggestion that he could be categorised 
as ‘un écrivain de la survie’. See Doubrovsky in interview with Contat (2001: 
126).

Contemporary Life Writing 
101 
(Doubrovsky in interview with Louette 2000-2001: 214). Dou-
brovsky’s literary pursuits are, then, at least partially motivated by the 
desire to achieve something with which to justify his survival. Why 
though should Doubrovsky have deviated from his original career path 
as an academic to invest so much in life writing? 
In Un amour de soi (1982), one of the earlier works in Dou-
brovsky’s life writing corpus, the intratextual voice seems to explain 
the writer’s decision to undertake his own autobiographical project 
rather than to work solely as a literary critic. We are told that ‘comme, 
à travers les autres, on ne parle jamais que de soi, il est temps de le 
faire à visage découvert’ (UAS: 13). The decision to write autobio-
graphical literature seems to be for Doubrovsky the logical result of an 
ontological belief that all scholarly endeavour is inevitably coloured 
and shaped by the author’s own concerns. If this is accepted to be the 
case, then it is clearly better to embrace the self overtly and to fore-
ground its presence in literature, than to hide behind a pretence of fo-
cusing upon something else. Despite its author’s clear belief in the 
impossibility of producing anything other than the self-referential, 
Doubrovsky’s work incorporates numerous references to his sense of 
being excluded from the most obviously self-referential genre, that of 
autobiography ‘proper’. For example, in Le Livre brisé (1989), he tells 
us that ‘l’autobiographie n’est pas un genre démocratique: une chasse 
gardée, un club fermé, un privilège jaloux. Réservé aux importants de 
ce monde, grands écrivains, capitaines d’armée, d’industrie’ (LLB: 
256). A little later in the same piece, the intratextual Doubrovsky – the 
narrator of his autofictional realm – concludes that ‘grand-homme-au-
soir-de-sa-vie-et-dans-un-beau-style. Peux pas prendre la pose. […]. 
J’Y AI PAS LE DROIT. Pas membre du club, on me refuse l’entrée. 
MA VIE N’INTÉRESSE PERSONNE’ (LLB: 256; see also UAS: 
90). The feeling of being unworthy of the genre of autobiography cau-
ses Doubrovsky to assert that ‘l’autobiographie, ce panthéon des pom-
pes funèbres, l’accès m’en est interdit. D’accord. Mais je puis m’y in-
troduire en fraude. Resquiller, à la faveur de la fiction, sous le couvert 
du roman’ (LLB: 256). The sub-genre of autofiction, then, is formu-
lated by Doubrovsky as a way in which to write the story of his life

Contemporary Life Writing 
102 
without tackling the formidable ramparts of the edifice of conven-
tional autobiography.20 
The blend of factual and fictional inputs into Doubrovsky’s 
autofictional writing is highly complex. Unlike many classic autobiog-
raphers the extratextual writer claims never to have kept a diary upon 
whose record of daily events and thoughts he might have drawn. He 
does, however, make great use of old letters, citing real excerpts from 
a correspondence in Un amour de soi (1982) and using his own letters 
to his mother to stimulate his memory in Laissé pour conte (1999). 
Perhaps unexpectedly, one element of Doubrovsky’s autofictional 
oeuvre that significantly modifies the balance of truth and fiction in 
his books is his relationship with language. He tells us: 
 
Je sens que lorsque j’écris, je louche, parce que mon oeil d’un côté re-
garde vers le référent – l’histoire qui m’est arrivée – et l’autre œil, en 
même temps, regarde le jeu des mots, la manière dont ils s’accouplent, 
s’assemblent etc. Et c’est à l’intérieur de ce jeu de mots que je glisse 
le référent. (Doubrovsky in interview with Hughes 1999) 
 
In a later interview he reinforces the argument that the referential is 
modified by the play with language, telling us that in his books real 
life experiences are ‘modul[és] par une musique de l’écriture’ in order 
to create ‘d’émotions immédiates’ rather than ‘un récit ordonné’.21 
Doubrovsky’s writing style, then, bespeaks a highly playful impulse to 
experiment with words and puns. In doing so, it firmly rejects the tra-
ditional division that equated factual writing with the biographical and 
literary language with the fictional. Moreover, so important does 
Doubrovsky rate this relationship with language that he tells us that 
‘l’aventure de langage définit l’autofiction’ (Doubrovsky in interview 
with Contat 2001: 119). 
                                                 
20 
This notion of conventional or ‘classic’ autobiography refers back, of course 
to that style of life writing interrogated a little earlier in my discussion and de-
fined by Lejeune as ‘récit rétrospectif en prose qu’une personne réelle fait de 
sa propre existence, lorsqu’elle met l’accent sur sa vie individuelle, en par-
ticulier sur l’histoire de sa personnalité’ (Lejeune 1975: 14). 
21 
See Doubrovsky in interview with Contat (2001: 120). For further discussions 
of the relationship between the referential and language, particularly in his 
later works, see Doubrovsky in interview with Hughes (1999).

Contemporary Life Writing 
103 
In fact, any preconception that this play with language might 
distance the text from the ‘truth’ would be highly misleading. The 
playful writing style that is particularly striking in Doubrovsky’s ear-
lier autofictions can be linked to another formative preoccupation of 
his: that of psychoanalysis. Having undergone an extensive course of 
analysis following the death of his mother, Doubrovsky chooses not 
merely to inscribe this experience as a theme within his writing, but to 
weave it into the very structure of his books. As Annie Jouan-
Westlund has argued, there are many examples within Doubrovsky’s 
work in which he seems to be attempting to find a language that is as 
close as possible to his unconscious (Jouan-Westlund 1997: 426). In-
deed, Doubrovsky’s remarks in recent interviews seem to support this 
hypothesis. He argues, for example, that ‘mon écriture est semi-
automatique, c’est-à-dire que le flux verbal domine tout’ (Doubrovsky 
in interview with Contat 2001: 122). Similarly, in a different interview 
he asserted that ‘je n’écris pas mes livres, mes livres s’écrivent à tra-
vers moi’ (Doubrovsky in interview with Hughes 1999). The free-
flowing writing style that Doubrovsky argues to be of paramount im-
portance to his autofictions, then, seems to be closely linked with the 
author’s own psychoanalytic experiences and his interest in his own 
unconscious. Doubrovsky’s textual relationship with psychoanalysis is 
in fact a particularly interesting feature of his work. As Philippe Le-
jeune points out in Moi aussi (1986), whereas many life writers seek 
merely to tell the story of their analysis in their texts, through his writ-
ing Doubrovsky ‘veut la prolonger’.22 Indeed, it is feasible to believe 
that Doubrovsky’s autofictional writing could be seen to be the locus 
of his ‘real’ or ‘authentic’ analysis, because whereas his sessions with 
the psychoanalyst Robert Akeret took place in English, writing allows 
Doubrovsky to continue the work of turning his neuroses into words 
within the medium of his langue maternelle.23 The word play and 
punning accorded such an important role within Doubrovsky’s auto-
fictions cannot, then, be seen as a distraction from the referential truth. 
                                                 
22 
In his discussion of this matter, Lejeune cites Marie Cardinal as an example of 
a writer who seeks to tell the story of her analysis through writing (Lejeune 
1986: 62).  
23 
In his recent interview with Michel Contat, Doubrovsky argued: ‘pourquoi 
cette écriture de la consonance? Une hypothèse: comme j’ai fait ma psychana-
lyse en anglais, j’ai refait une expérience quasi analytique en laissant 
l’initiative aux mots’ (Doubrovsky in interview with Contat 2001: 135).

Contemporary Life Writing 
104 
On the contrary, Doubrovsky suggests that by engaging with his un-
conscious and incorporating his psychoanalytic experiences into his 
literature he will produce life writing that is not truer, but richer ‘au 
sens où l’on dit que l’uranium a été par traitement, lui aussi, enrichi’ 
(Doubrovsky 1988: 78). 
Perhaps, then, in addition to the motivations for writing that 
Robin identifies in relation to Doubrovsky, particularly the desire to 
achieve something to justify surviving his wartime experiences, we 
can identify another motivation here. For Doubrovsky, autofictional 
writing seems to constitute a way of prolonging his psychoanalysis, 
and of transferring it into his first language. He tells us: ‘l’autobiogra-
phie n’est pas un genre littéraire, c’est un remède métaphysique’ 
(LLB: 255). Just like psychoanalysis, autofiction provides a forum in 
which a ‘fiction’ of personal history and selfhood is constructed with 
which the individual can live. As Doubrovsky himself has commen-
ted, ‘le sens d’une vie n’existe nulle part, n’existe pas. Il n’est pas à 
découvrir, mais à inventer, non de toutes pièces, mais de toutes traces: 
il est à construire’ (Doubrovsky 1988: 77). Whereas much conven-
tional autobiographical writing is undertaken merely in order to record 
the stories of individuals who society judges to have led particularly 
interesting lives, this is not apparently the case for Doubrovsky. His 
intratextual persona, ‘Serge Doubrovsky’, tells us: ‘depuis que je 
transforme ma vie en phrases, je me trouve intéressant. À mesure que 
je deviens le personnage de mon roman, je me passionne pour moi’ 
(UAS: 91). Rather than the events of an interesting life adding to-
gether to make a great autobiography, then, it seems that for Dou-
brovsky this formula is reversed: it is the process of literary inscrip-
tion that makes him and his life interesting, perhaps even bearable. 
This argument is supported by John Ireland, who tells us that for Dou-
brovsky the function of writing is not to represent his life but to re-
deem it (Ireland 1993: 4-5). Indeed, in Le Livre brisé the intratextual, 
autofictional Doubrovsky does overtly claim that ‘mes écrits plaident 
ma cause’ (LLB: 66). As Jean-Luc Pagès points out, on the back cover 
of the original version of Fils Doubrovsky is credited with the words 
‘ma vie ratée sera une réussite littéraire’ (Pagès 2000: 186).  From this 
it can be inferred that, in addition to providing an arena in which Dou-
brovsky can construct a meaning for his life, this writer believes that 
literature also wields the capacity to compensate for the failures of 
life.

Contemporary Life Writing 
105 
Despite the fictional elements of his autofictions, then, it is 
abundantly clear that in the literary world of Doubrovsky’s life writ-
ing, life and text are caught up in a complex and mutually influential 
relationship. Indeed, so closely interwoven are Doubrovsky’s life and 
texts that the consequences of what Doubrovsky writes are particu-
larly severe. Both Doubrovsky himself and those around him pay a 
high price for being transformed into literature. John Ireland’s argu-
ments are again helpful here, as he suggests that 
 
Autofiction, for all the ludic dimension of its inter-generic play, is a 
very high stakes game. Doubrovsky’s stated goal to make the word 
flesh hides the extent to which this ambition constitutes a reversible 
proposition in which ultimately the inverse metamorphosis must pre-
vail. Autofiction feeds on flesh. (Ireland 1993: 10) 
 
In seeking to push literature to the limits of the possible, Doubrovsky 
in fact pushes his life to the limit too, a fact with which he battles most 
obviously in Le Livre brisé. This work begins with the intratextual 
Doubrovsky’s wife Ilse throwing down the gauntlet and challenging 
him to write the story of their relationship and marriage. The book is, 
however, ‘broken’ by Ilse’s death after she reads the manuscript. In 
fact, it is the specific modalities of Doubrovsky’s autofictional en-
deavour that greatly increase the risks involved: whereas in classic 
autobiography the events of life are typically separated from their nar-
ration by a time lapse, autofiction overtly and wilfully seeks to narrate 
everything in the present. As Annie Jouan-Westlund signals: 
 
By telling his life as it is lived, Doubrovsky pushes the temporal limits 
of the genre. He manages to synchronize the time of the story with the 
time of the narration. What constitutes his greatest achievement in Le 
Livre brisé also constitutes his greatest mistake because the time con-
junction between the two instances raises an insoluble problem that 
constitutes the most important transgression in the text: can the text be 
held responsible for Ilse’s death, or is it the purely coincidental retell-
ing of her death? (Jouan-Westlund 1997: 428) 
 
Whatever judgement is made on this matter, it is clear that the death of 
Ilse plunges Doubrovsky’s autofictional enterprise into crisis. Intratex-
tually, this is signalled with the question: ‘comment vouloir faire de la 
mort de sa femme, littérature’? (LLB: 316). The conclusion, perhaps 
fortunately, is that whilst Ilse may have been silenced, ‘l’écrivain n’a 
pas le droit de se taire. […] L’écrivain est la part inhumaine de

Contemporary Life Writing 
106 
l’homme’ (LLB: 311). In sum, it is clear that when life and literature 
are so immediately and closely interlinked, the price paid is high. As 
the intratextual Doubrovsky himself tells us: ‘si on joue le jeu de la 
vérité, vraiment: ça devient un jeu de massacre’ (LLB: 281). 
 
 
Doubrovsky’s Autofictional Corpus 
 
Doubrovsky’s oeuvre is in many ways highly coherent. In fact, in his 
extratextual discussions of his books he himself suggests that they 
very definitely belong to one overall literary project. He tells us that 
each book is situated in a different period of his life and correspond-
ingly has a different style.24 Moreover, in recent times, Doubrovsky 
has stressed his perception of these works as different components of 
a single whole, telling us: 
 
maintenant […] j’ai le sentiment que l’oeuvre se referme sur elle-
même. Ce qui avait été mon projet, écrire à chaque fois un livre, de la 
sorte que la somme forme une oeuvre, j’ai l’impression maintenant 
que par rapport à ces livres –– il y en a sept si je compte bien –– je me 
trouve maintenant à l’extérieur, hors texte… même s’il m’arrive 
d’écrire encore. (Doubrovsky in interview with Louette 2000-2001: 
210) 
 
The coherence of Doubrovsky’s oeuvre is reinforced by the strength 
of the intertextual connections between individual works. For exam-
ple, in Un amour de soi, there is a reference to ‘mon premier roman, 
La Dispersion’ (UAS: 49). In Laissé pour conte there are references to 
Fils and Un amour de soi (LPC: 263).25  It would, however, be highly 
naive not to distinguish between the individual components of Dou-
brovsky’s oeuvre. In fact, closer examination reveals that not all of 
Doubrovsky’s literary publications can be considered to be autofic-
tions, and therefore will not be focused on in this work. The two vol-
                                                 
24 
See Doubrovsky in interview with Contat (2001: 120). As Jaccomard has 
commented: ‘l’organisation n’est pas chronologique, mais procède par asso-
ciation d’idées au sein d’une époque déterminée ce qui occasionne des oscilla-
tions dans le temps, des rappels, des répétitions intra-textuelles (au sein d’un 
même volume) et extra-textuelles (au sein de l’œuvre)’ (Jaccomard 1993: 82). 
25 
For a discussion of the intertext between the different volumes of Dou-
brovsky’s oeuvre see Doubrovsky in interview with Hughes (1999).

Contemporary Life Writing 
107 
umes published by Doubrovsky that seem most incongruous with the 
rest of his oeuvre are Le Jour S (1963) and La Vie L’Instant (1985). 
The first of these, Le Jour S (1963), which was also Doubrovsky’s 
very first literary publication, is rarely referred to by the author him-
self, and is certainly not counted as belonging to his autofictional oeu-
vre. He tells us that Le Jour S (1963) ‘est un peu à part. […] Ça ne fait 
pas vraiment partie de mon œuvre’ (Doubrovsky in interview with 
Louette 2000-2001: 211). La Vie L’Instant (1985) is also a work that 
is rarely referred to by either author or critics. Moreover, its composi-
tion as a collection of short stories, albeit ones in which the subject 
matter bears a striking resemblance with Doubrovsky’s life, means 
that it does not comply with Doubrovsky’s own strict definition of 
autofiction. 
La Dispersion, published in 1969, has provoked considerable 
debate amongst critics. This volume is far from the most well known 
of Doubrovsky’s works and its generic status is somewhat ambiguous. 
It is clearly labelled ‘roman’, despite being written in the first person 
singular and is similar in both style and content to Doubrovsky’s fu-
ture works. Despite these ‘trademark’ characteristics of Doubrovsky’s 
later autofictions, there is no proof of intratextual nominal identity be-
tween the author, narrator and protagonist and therefore no autofic-
tional pact is established in La Dispersion. Patrick Saveau, a critic 
who studied under Doubrovsky’s direction, argues that despite this, 
the work is generally accepted to be an autofiction because it ‘contains 
in gestation the following six volumes’ (1999: 27). This judgement is 
however somewhat difficult to accept. Whilst La Dispersion may con-
tain the kernel out of which Doubrovsky’s future autofictional project 
grew, it cannot be said that this work contains an autofictional pact, 
and therefore will not constitute part of the corpus of Doubrovsky’s 
works upon which my analysis will focus. 
The first of Doubrovsky’s books to be clearly identifiable as 
autofiction was published in 1977, entitled ‘Fils’. In fact, it is this 
work that Doubrovsky claims to have been writing when he read Le 
Pacte autobiographique and realised that his own work defied Le-
jeune’s generic classifications. Despite being labelled ‘roman’, then, a 
nominal relationship is established between the author, narrator and 
protagonist, as there are intratextual references to the author’s first 
names (Julien-Serge: 59 and 201), as well as his surname (Dou-
brovsky: 68 and 201), and his mother’s name (Weitzmann: 230 and

Contemporary Life Writing 
108 
312). Moreover, despite the apparently confusing structure of this 
multi-layered and fragmented book, as Hélène Jaccomard has pointed 
out, it is in fact organised ‘de manière on-ne-peut-plus classique, selon 
l’unité de temps d’une tragédie, une journée dans la vie de Serge’ 
(Jaccomard 1993: 82). That is to say that, in true autofictional style, an 
imagined time frame is constructed through which some of the in-
tratextual Doubrovsky’s most pressing concerns can be explored. As I 
argued above, this is, according to Doubrovsky, one of the classic 
traits of autofiction.26 
The second of Doubrovsky’s works to be classed as an autofic-
tion is Un amour de soi, which was published in 1982. This book, 
which Doubrovsky claims to have been structured around a musical 
metaphor,27 contains a similarly complex blend of themes. Moreover, 
like Fils, Un amour de soi is labelled ‘roman’ and is written in the 
first person singular. It contains fewer intratextual references to the 
author’s name, however (merely ‘S.D.’: 254; ‘Julien’: 147; and the 
signature ‘S.D.’ on the back cover), and hence the autofictional pact is 
potentially weak. The generic status of this work is signalled and 
‘sealed’, however, by a metanarrative passage in which the intratex-
tual Doubrovsky seeks to explain the autofictional project. He tells us 
that his writing 
 
[n’est] pas une autobiographie, vraiment, c’est là une chasse gardée, 
un club exclusif pour des gens célèbres. Pour y avoir droit, il faut être 
quelqu’un. […] Moi, je ne suis, dans mon petit deux-pièces 
d’emprunt, personne. J’existe à peine, je suis un être fictif. J’écris mon 
autofiction. (UAS: 90-91) 
 
The inclusion of this metanarrative passage suggests strongly to the 
reader that Un amour de soi, its narrative container, can be classified 
precisely as an autofictional construct. 
                                                 
26 
As Doubrovsky himself commented in an extratextual discussion of a particu-
lar passage of Fils, ‘il n’y a pas un détail dans ce passage qui ne soit vérifia-
ble, mais il n’y a pas un seul détail qui soit historiquement vrai’. Serge Dou-
brovsky, ‘Autofiction et écriture de soi ’, Colloque sur Serge Doubrovsky à 
Dijon, November 2000, CD.  
27 
Doubrovsky lists this musical structure as ‘prélude, fugue, in coda, et des spi-
rales’. See Doubrovsky in interview with Contat (2001: 127).

Contemporary Life Writing 
109 
Both Le Livre brisé and L’Après-vivre use nominal identifica-
tion and metanarrative commentary to compel the reader to effect an 
autofictional pact in the texts s/he is reading. Le Livre brisé, rendered 
notorious by virtue of the death during production of one of its main 
characters, was published in 1989. In this work, there are not only fre-
quent intratextual references to the author’s name (Julien-Serge: 154; 
Julien, Serge and Doubrovsky: 270; ‘Weitzmann’: 271) but also a 
brief pseudo-autobiography in which many verifiable, key details 
about Doubrovsky’s life are given (259-260). Despite its being la-
belled ‘roman’, then, it is clear that it makes overt references to the 
extratextual Serge Doubrovsky’s life. Moreover, in this work, metan-
arrative intratextual commentaries upon the frontier between fact and 
fiction at which autofiction is located seem to proliferate. For exam-
ple, we read: ‘UN ROMAN VRAI. […] On chatouille l’imagination. 
On certifie que l’imaginaire est véridique. Jouissance double: le rêve 
et la réalité’ (LLB: 65). A little later we read: ‘même en voulant dire 
vrai, on écrit faux. On lit faux. Folie. Une vie réelle passée se présente 
comme une vie fictive future. Raconter sa vie, c’est toujours le monde 
à l’envers’ (LLB: 76). Indeed, intratextually inscribing his wife Ilse’s 
reproaches for ‘inexactitudes’, the intratextual Doubrovsky seems to 
justify the autofictional project. He tells us: ‘une fiction, ça déforme, 
ça reforme, ça synthétise. De la vérité, ça extrait la quintessence, ça ne 
fournit pas tous les détails’ (LLB: 279). Le Livre brisé, like Fils and 
Un amour de soi before it, is, then, firmly located with the remit of the 
sub-genre of autofiction. 
L’Après-vivre, published in 1994, is an equally moving work, 
which focuses primarily on the experience of the intratextual Dou-
brovsky’s depression after Ilse’s death, as well as a new relationship 
with ‘Elle’. In this work, again narrated in the first person singular, 
nominal identity is clearly established between author, narrator and 
protagonist (Doubrovsky: 31; Julien-Serge: 121). Moreover, once 
again, an overt metanarrative explanation of autofiction encourages 
the reader to receive the text as an instance of that which its narrator 
describes: 
 
J’ai pris l’habitude, depuis des années, de mettre ma vie en récits. 
D’en faire, par tranche, des sortes de romans. J’ai appelé ça, faute de 
mieux, mon «autofiction». De l’autobiographie toute chaude, à vif, qui 
saigne, mais recomposée selon les normes propres de l’écriture. Ma

Contemporary Life Writing 
110 
vie, mais pour aboutir à des livres. Qui se lisent comme une œuvre 
romanesque. (AV: 20) 
 
Laissé pour conte, published in 1999 and proposed by Doubrovsky 
himself both intra- and extratextually to be the last volume of his oeu-
vre, is perhaps the most generically complex of his later books. This 
work, which was published with the subtitle ‘roman’, is narrated in the 
first person singular, and contains extensive intratextual references to 
the author’s name as befits an autofiction (S.D.: 52; Julien Serge: 118 
and 242; Julien: 192; Serge Doubrovsky: 242; Doubrovsky: 410). In 
addition, there are overt references to the autofictional writing proc-
ess: ‘Serge Doubrovsky, j’en suis l’auteur, c’est mon personnage, mon 
double, mon moi en mots’ (237). Moreover, on the back cover, in a 
passage signed ‘S.D.’, we are told that the books that this writer has 
produced over the last thirty years can be classified as autofiction. He 
goes on to tell us that 
 
À l’inverse de l’autobiographie, explicative et unifiante, qui veut res-
saisir et dérouler les fils d’un destin, l’autofiction ne perçoit pas la vie 
comme un tout. Elle n’a affaire qu’à des fragments disjoints, des mor-
ceaux d’existence brisés, un sujet morcelé qui ne coïncide pas avec 
lui-même.’ (LPC, back cover) 
 
Despite the clarity of the author’s own views, however, the classifica-
tion of this work as an autofiction has been challenged by some crit-
ics. In an interview published in 1999, for example, Alex Hughes 
asked Doubrovsky if Laissé pour conte should not in fact be consid-
ered to be more like a classic autobiography than an autofiction be-
cause of the more totalising view of life that is seems to adopt when 
compared with his earlier works. This suggestion was refuted by Dou-
brovsky on the grounds that the structure of Laissé pour conte is at 
odds with the chronological récit that classic autobiography requires. 
He went on to argue that despite being underpinned by the apparently 
‘totalising’ question ‘ma vie a-t-elle un sens?’, the view of his life of-
fered by this work is of ‘une totalité détotalisée’ (Doubrovsky in in-
terview with Hughes 1999). Although Laissé pour conte may seem to 
be a more totalising work than Doubrovsky’s previous books, the 
strength of the author’s articulation of its autofictional status means 
that it will be retained here as a focus of study.

Contemporary Life Writing 
111 
In this study, I shall examine those five volumes of Dou-
brovsky’s literary writing that can be said to comprise the main body 
of his work, being linked by their sharing of the same, or very similar 
generic status, and also by the strong intertext between them that indi-
cates continuity in the identity of the narrator. Having briefly estab-
lished the general characteristics of and underlying motivations for 
Doubrovsky’s writing, as well as the generic status of those works that 
I will study in this monograph, it is to the next of my three authors that 
my discussion will now turn. 
 
 
2.3 Hervé Guibert 
 
Hervé Guibert was born in 1955 in Paris and died on 27th December 
1991. After growing up in Paris and La Rochelle, he worked for many 
years as a journalist in Paris, first at Le Monde and subsequently at 
L’Autre Journal. Whilst Guibert was employed primarily as a photog-
raphy critic, he also wrote about fashion, cinema and theatre.28 In fact, 
his flexibility as a journalist was paralleled by the diversity of his ar-
tistic interests, which included painting and photography as well as 
writing novels, plays, film scenarios and short stories. Between 1977 
and his death in 1991, Guibert published around twenty books, to be 
followed by a further seven posthumous publications. It was indis-
putably the publication of A l’ami qui ne m’a pas sauvé la vie in 1990, 
however, that earned Guibert his recognition in France. This work, 
which is often classified as a first generation AIDS text, tells the tale 
of the intratextual Hervé Guibert’s diagnosis as HIV positive and his 
subsequent experience of deteriorating health. At the time of its publi-
cation A l’ami was the focus of much publicity not only because it 
confronted the greatly feared and little understood entity of AIDS, but 
also because it contained thinly veiled textual revelations about high 
profile French cultural figures such as Michel Foucault and Isabelle 
Adjani. Guibert’s status as ‘France’s premier sida novelist’ (Apter 
1993: 83) was consolidated by the publication of Le Protocole com-
passionnel in 1991 and, posthumously, L’Homme au chapeau rouge 
                                                 
28 
In an article in Le Monde, Frederic Gaussen argues that according to Yvonne 
Baby, the former head of cultural affairs who recruited Guibert for Le Monde, 
Guibert was ‘un journaliste inépuisable’ capable of writing about a large range 
of subjects (Gaussen 2000: 10).

Contemporary Life Writing 
112 
(1992a) and Cytomégalovirus (1992b). Like A l’ami, these texts also 
focused upon an HIV positive narrator named ‘Hervé Guibert’. In ad-
dition, Guibert’s autobiographical video diary, La Pudeur ou l’impu-
deur, which was closely linked to A l’ami, was screened posthumously 
on 30th January 1992 on TF1, mainstream French television. The im-
pact of Guibert’s work, then, which made him the focus of many 
newspaper articles, as well as getting him invited onto television pro-
grammes such as ‘Apostrophes’ (16th March 1990) and ‘Ex-Libris’ (7th 
March 1991), was considerable.29 Whilst in recent times there has 
been renewed interest in Guibert’s oeuvre as a whole, it was indis-
putably the books that he wrote in the last three years of his life, those 
in which AIDS plays at least some part, which reached the greatest 
number of people and had the greatest cultural resonance.30 It is upon 
these life writing texts, works that are deeply bound up with some of 
the most interesting questions of self and literature, self and culture, 
that I will focus in this study. 
 
 
Guibert’s Literary Motivations and Beliefs 
 
Unlike Doubrovsky, Guibert seems to have been relatively shy of in-
dulging in extratextual discussions of his own literary production. 
Apart from those comments and explanations resulting from the media 
attention generated by the publication of A l’ami, which occurred to-
wards the end of Guibert’s writing career and which frequently fo-
cused on the scandalous aspects of his later works, there exist few re-
cords of Guibert’s early writerly motivations and philosophies. Pulling 
together evidence from a range of sources, however, some conclusions 
can be drawn. Analysis of Guibert’s work as a journalist, for example, 
shows that his great passions in life were the literary and creative 
arts.31 Moreover, within his intratextual narrations of selfhood, there 
                                                 
29 
An extensive selection of newspaper articles about Guibert can be found at 
IMEC in Paris. For detailed analysis of Guibert’s two television appearances, 
see Boulé (1995b: 112-120). 
30 
As Jean-Pierre Boulé has documented, A l’ami qui ne m’a pas sauvé la vie be-
came a bestseller, having sold over 350,000 copies by September 1994 (Boulé 
1995a: 2). 
31 
Analysis of the ‘dossiers de presse’ held at the IMEC, for example, show nu-
merous examples of articles written by Guibert about all areas of the arts, in-

Contemporary Life Writing 
113 
are hints that Guibert’s aim in life was to become a great writer.32 In 
Le Protocole compassionnel (1991), for example, the intratextual 
Guibert tells us that ‘j’ai toujours su que je ferais un jour un grand 
succès d’un de mes livres’ (Le PC: 148). More specifically, there is 
some evidence to suggest that Guibert’s later works at least were mo-
tivated by some of the classic desires of conventional autobiographers. 
For example, in a diary entry written shortly before his death, Guibert 
wrote that ‘un des rôles de la littérature est l’apprentissage de la mort’ 
(Guibert 1993: 23). In this, he seems to indicate a belief that through 
literature he can explore the ultimate unknown element of human ex-
perience: that of death. A little later in the same diary entry Guibert 
appears to suggest that he also feels a desire to leave a lasting inscrip-
tion of his identity that will remain after his death. He writes that ‘tant 
de gens pensent à moi que je n’ai presque plus besoin d’exister main-
tenant’ (Guibert 1993: 23). It seems, then, that Guibert’s writing is 
motivated at least partially by some of the classic motors of life writ-
ing. Once AIDS makes its presence felt within Guibert’s work, it 
seems that writing fulfils another function that is far from unusual. Ex-
tratextually Guibert suggests, for example, that he uses writing as a 
coping strategy that helps him to deal with his deteriorating health and 
the debasing medical treatments that he is increasingly obliged to un-
dergo. On ‘Apostrophes’, for example, he asserts that ‘quand j’écris, 
tout ce que j’écris, une fois que c’est écrit, c’est oublié’.33 This senti-
ment is echoed around a year later when Guibert appeared on ‘Ex-
Libris’, telling us that ‘à partir du moment où je l’ai écrit, je m’en fi-
che’. 
However, what is perhaps less conventional in Guibert’s writing 
is the intensity of the relationship between text and self, particularly as 
his health deteriorates. The intratextual Guibert tells us in A l’ami, for 
example, that ‘je tiens à mon livre plus qu’à ma vie’ (ALA: 274). At 
certain key moments in the deterioration of his health, the intratextual 
                                                                                                         
cluding Vincent Van Gogh (Le Monde, 11th February 1982); Man Ray (Le 
Monde, 5th February, 1981); the Cannes Festival (Le Monde, 23rd May 1982). 
32 
Information gleaned from within Guibert’s literary works must, of course, be 
treated with caution. As will become clear from the discussion in section 2.3.2 
even when the intratextual narrator is named as ‘Hervé Guibert’, no simple as-
sumptions can be made about the veracity or the referentiality of the text. 
33 
Hervé Guibert speaking on ‘Apostrophes’, 16th March 1990.

Contemporary Life Writing 
114 
Guibert overtly signals that he must choose between writing a new 
book and committing suicide (ALA: 60). This desperate choice was 
pertinent to the extratextual Guibert as well as his constructed literary 
self, as an extract of his diary published in Libération confirms. Here 
he writes ‘trois livres en chantier, c’est un peu trop. Mais tant qu’ils 
resteront en chantier, ils seront un prétexte pour ne pas me tuer’ (Gui-
bert 1993: 23). Ironically, then, the illness that threatens his ability to 
write, making him battle against ‘monstrous’ tiredness, also serves to 
spur him on. As critics have pointed out, Guibert’s literary production 
proliferated in the last years of his life (Sarkonak 1997b: 10). This is 
referred to by the intratextual Guibert in A l’ami, who explains that 
‘soudain, à cause de l’annonce de ma mort, m’avait saisi l’envie 
d’écrire tous les livres possibles, tous ceux que je n’avais pas encore 
écrits’ (ALA: 73). The illness that will kill Guibert, then, is also what 
makes him fulfil what he seems to have believed to be his destiny, by 
playing a significant role in generating the recognition that he 
craves.34 In fact, the extreme interdependency of body and text is indi-
cated when the intratextual Guibert, demonstrating a curious faith in 
the powers of literature, tells us: ‘j’attends avec impatience le vaccin 
littéraire qui me délivrera’ (ALA: 233). As Christopher Robinson 
notes in Scandal in the Ink (1995), ‘in both A L’ami and Le Protocole 
compassionnel, the body of the writer becomes identified with the 
body of the text […] the writing of the text is a dual writing of the 
writer and of that which is destroying him. Guibert’s perception of the 
future of his condition and of his book are parallel’ (Robinson 1995: 
135). 
Guibert is motivated initially, then, by a desire to achieve liter-
ary greatness. With the advent of his illness, it seems that writing be-
comes a more urgent preoccupation, and he seeks not only to ‘beat’ 
death by writing all that he has left in him to write as quickly as possi-
ble, but also to prolong his life by giving it purpose through writing. 
How, though, are we to characterise his oeuvre? 
It is perhaps unsurprising that a textual production that ranges 
from ‘un roman policier de série B’35 to a ‘journal d’hospitalisation’, 
                                                 
34 
He tells us ‘j’étais mon propre personnage […] et le sida a fait de moi un hé-
ros’ (Hervé Guibert speaking on ‘Ex-Libris’, 7th March 1991). 
35 
This is Alan Buisine’s description of L’Homme au chapeau rouge (1992). See 
Buisine (1997: 102).

Contemporary Life Writing 
115 
via a tale accused by some of being pornographic, should frequently 
be deemed by critics to be unclassifiable.36 Moreover, despite the clear 
influence of a number of different writers upon his work, as Jean-
Pierre Boulé points out, Guibert overtly signalled his desire not to be-
long to any literary school.37 Despite these factors, some features can 
be identified as remaining constant throughout Guibert’s corpus. For 
example, unlike that of Doubrovsky, Guibert’s writing is characterised 
by a clear, direct style that has been described by some critics as 
‘journalistic’. Frédéric Martel argues that some of the most striking 
features of Guibert’s work are ‘sa grande lisibilité’, ‘son accessibilité’ 
and ‘son style journalistique’ (Martel 1994: 168). Rather than produc-
ing an intricately constructed, complex body of text that is full of 
word play, then, Guibert’s writing seems to attempt to convey his 
ideas simply to his readers. This desire to communicate seems, per-
haps unsurprisingly, to become increasingly urgent in his AIDS texts. 
In Le Protocole compassionnel, for example, Guibert’s previously pu-
blished A l’ami is described as ‘une lettre qui a été téléfaxée dans le 
cœur de cent mille personnes’. The book that the intratextual Guibert 
claims to be currently writing for his readers is described with the 
words ‘je suis en train de leur écrire une nouvelle lettre. Je vous écris’ 
(Le PC: 141). It seems, then, that Guibert’s writing can be character-
ised by the relative simplicity of the language that he uses. 
A helpful contribution to the attempt to characterise Guibert’s 
diverse literary and textual output is made by Ralph Sarkonak in Le 
Corps textuel de Hervé Guibert (1997). Sarkonak argues that ‘l’oeuvre 
de Guibert, hautement éclectique, est cependent unifée par sa dimen-
sion autobiographique’ (Sarkonak 1997a: 6). This formulation is sup-
ported by Jean-Pierre Boulé who asserts that a constant feature of 
Guibert’s oeuvre is that ‘il est lui-même la matière de son livre’ (Bou-
lé 2001: 527). There is certainly much within Guibert’s work that 
draws upon elements of his own life. Des Aveugles (1985), for exam-
ple, could be said to be linked to the long period of voluntary work 
                                                 
36 
For a discussion of the difficulty of classifying Guibert’s work, see Dar-
rieussecq (1997b: 115-116) and also Boulé (2001: 529). For a discussion of 
the controversy surrounding, for example, Les Chiens, a work deemed so por-
nographic by Marguerite Duras that she attempted to prevent its publication, 
see Buot (1999: 116). 
37 
See Boulé (2001: 528). For a discussion of the influence of other writers on 
Guibert see Bianciotti (1991).

Contemporary Life Writing 
116 
that Guibert undertook in an institute for blind people. In addition, the 
‘Académie espagnole’ that features in L’Incognito (1989) bears clear 
resemblance to the ‘Villa Médicis’ in Rome where Guibert lived for 
some years (Buot 1999: 216). Moreover, Guibert’s Great Aunts, or at 
least some version of them, seem to feature in a number of his works, 
including Suzanne et Louise (1980); Les Gangsters (1988) and Mes 
Parents (1986). The autobiographical dimension of Guibert’s work 
seems moreover to be reinforced by his apparent desire, at least on a 
superficial level, authorially to tell the truth. In his appearance on 
‘Apostrophes’, for example, when asked to justify his textual revela-
tions about other people, Guibert argued simply that ‘la vérité a une 
vertu’.38 In A l’ami there are frequent references to unveiling and reve-
lation. We are told, for example, ‘j’ai senti mon sang […] découvert, 
mis à nu’. At the same point in the narrative there are references to ‘ce 
sang dénudé et exposé’ and ‘mon sang démasqué’ (ALA: 14). More-
over, Guibert’s professed authorial desire to ‘tout dire’ is often cited 
by critics (Pratt 1998: 158). In fact, even some literary critics seem to 
believe that Guibert’s work is marked by a desire to tell a total truth: 
as Martel argues ‘il dit tout. Sans faire de tri’ (Martel 1994: 168). The 
self-referential impulse underpinning Guibert’s oeuvre seems, in sum, 
to echo the precepts underlying classic autobiography, as defined 
above. 
It would, however, be unwise to assume that Guibert’s writing 
can be characterised as motivated by a desire to articulate referential, 
externally verifiable material in clear, transparent language. Looking 
beneath the facade of sincerity it is clear that Guibert’s relationship 
with truth-telling is highly complex. Even those works that I have 
identified above as clearly drawing upon ‘real’ elements of Guibert’s 
life also contain overtly fantastical elements.39 Moreover, in an article 
entitled ‘La notion de leurre chez Hervé Guibert: Décryptage d’un 
roman-leurre, L’Incognito’, Marie Darrieussecq argues that Guibert’s 
work is underpinned by ‘ce constant jeu de vrai-faux’ that she terms 
‘le leurre’. She asserts that ‘le leurre se retrouve comme thème récur-
                                                 
38 
Hervé Guibert speaking on ‘Apostrophes’, 16th March 1990. 
39 
Mes Parents (1986), for example, despite sometimes being hailed by critics as 
the most conventionally autobiographical of Guibert’s works is underpinned 
by a fantastic tale of blackmail, deception and intrigue. For a discussion of 
this work see Darrieussecq (1997b: 115-132).

Contemporary Life Writing 
117 
rent dans cette œuvre qui formille de déguisements, de tromperies, de 
promesses non tenues, de placebos dissimulés parmi de vrais médica-
ments’ (Darrieussecq 1995: 82). Whilst Darrieussecq’s discussion fo-
cuses primarily upon L’Incognito (1989), she argues that this play 
with truth and falsehood/fiction is evident throughout Guibert’s writ-
ing, and even goes as far as to attempt to forge a new term to describe 
it. She tells us: ‘ce que je propose d’appeler le «guibertinage» serait ce 
jeu de masques entre vérité et fiction’ (Darrieussecq 1995: 88). Rein-
forcing this, Guibert’s intratextual self refers to the ambiguous nature 
of his work in Le Protocole compassionnel telling us that ‘je sens bien 
qu’ils [mes livres] sont traversés, entre autres choses, par la vérité et le 
mensonge, la trahison, par ce thème de la méchanceté’ (Le PC: 132). 
The phenomenon of trickery and of a mixing of truth and lies, then, 
seems to be fundamental to Guibert’s work. In the AIDS texts upon 
which this monograph focuses, this theme is present not only in the 
construction of the texts, but at every level of the narrative. The in-
tratextual Guibert himself, for example, is tricked into believing in A 
l’ami that ‘Bill’ might provide him with ‘un vaccin curatif’ to save his 
life, a trick that leaves him feeling deeply betrayed (ALA: 265). In an 
incident entitled ‘la trahison de Marine’, a character who is often 
claimed to have been based upon the famous French actress, Isabelle 
Adjani, reneges upon her promise to make a film with the intratextual 
Guibert, leaving him in a precarious financial position (ALA: 89). In 
addition to the intratextual deceptions and betrayals, the text of A 
l’ami itself participates in the game of revelation, unmasking Michel 
Foucault as not only a homosexual who engaged in sado-masochistic 
sexual practices, but as having died from an AIDS-related illness.40 If 
Hélène Jaccomard’s argument is to be accepted that ‘le sida est un 
déshabillage’ as it reveals true behaviour (Jaccomard 1995: 290), then 
Guibert seems to be indicating that this is primarily because the world 
is full of trickery and deception. 
The fundamental characteristics of Guibert’s writing clearly 
make it particularly challenging for the reader. As I have argued, de-
spite being written in a clear, direct style, and professing to tell the 
                                                 
40 
Moreover, as Boulé has argued, ‘is not the biggest betrayal of all the one that 
the narrator perpetuates on himself? For by announcing that he is HIV posi-
tive, he is exposing himself to the world and risking being rejected’ (Boulé 
1995a: 33).

Contemporary Life Writing 
118 
truth, Guibert’s books play with truth and fiction. Indeed, as many 
critics have commented, Guibert’s works are fundamentally transgres-
sive: of social norms and codes, and of literary genres.41 As with Dou-
brovsky, Guibert’s intratextual recognition of this trickery may en-
courage a false sense of security in the reader, and a deferral of critical 
judgement in the assumption that the author will signal when fiction 
enters the text. As Boulé argues, ‘the reader has the illusion of being 
taken into the narrator’s confidence’ (Boulé 1995a: 10). Moreover, 
Schehr points out that the ‘lure’ of Guibert’s texts is particularly diffi-
cult to resist in his later works because of the emotive nature of AIDS. 
As Schehr argues, narrating the experience of living with AIDS risks 
engendering sympathy in the reader to the extent of blinding his or her 
critical faculties (Schehr 1996: 162). 
 
 
Guibert’s Life Writing: Corpus and Generic Status 
 
Guibert’s literary writing, then, is both diverse in nature and particu-
larly difficult to read because of its deceptive and transgressive char-
acter. It is therefore of paramount importance to establish the precise 
generic status of each of Guibert’s texts studied. It is to a discussion of 
this that I will now turn. 
In this work, I will focus on those texts written in the latter 
stages of Hervé Guibert’s life, often classified as his AIDS texts. 
There exists no consensus amongst critics as to which of his twenty-
seven texts should be included in a Guibertian AIDS corpus. The cir-
cumscription of his AIDS writing that I shall deploy here will be 
rather larger than most. I will focus on those texts normally deemed to 
belong to the AIDS trilogy: A l’ami qui ne m’a pas sauvé la vie 
(1990); Le Protocole compassionnel (1991); and L’Homme au cha-
peau rouge (1992). In addition, I will look at the hospital diary, Cy-
tomégalovirus (1992), and Le Paradis (1992), a work written contigu-
ously with Cytomégalovirus. What, then, can be said to be the generic 
status of each of these works? 
                                                 
41 
Ralph Sarkonak argues, for example, that ‘si l’oeuvre est fondamentalement 
transgressive, elle l’est avant tout par la façon dont elle met en question toute 
taxonimie générique, et qui plus est, toute distinction du vrai et du faux’ (Sar-
konak 1997b: 7).

Contemporary Life Writing 
119 
One of the major characteristics of Guibert’s writing is its auto-
biographical dimension. However, this characteristic is made more 
complex by the essentially transgressive nature of Guibert’s work, no-
tably his persistent challenging of the boundaries between truth and 
fiction. Indeed, it is clear that despite agreeing on the significant role 
that his own life plays in Guibert’s writing, critical opinion remains 
divided about the precise generic status of Guibert’s work. Ralph 
Sarkonak argues, for example, that ‘almost all of his [Guibert’s] writ-
ing could be considered autofictional’ (Sarkonak 1996: 179), a claim 
that is supported by Edmund Smyth in an article entitled ‘Des Aveu-
gles: Modes d’articulation’ (Smyth 1995: 8). Jean-Pierre Boulé, how-
ever, refutes this argument, and suggests instead that Guibert’s writing 
is located ‘mi-chemin entre l’autobiographie et l’autofiction’ at a site 
that he himself terms ‘le roman faux’ (Boulé 2001: 531). In fact, 
Boulé’s main reason for categorising Guibert’s work as ‘roman faux’ 
rather than ‘autofiction’ is that rather than scrupulously verifying 
dates and details like Doubrovsky, Guibert seems to seek to modify 
and transform the facts of his life. What Boulé does not discuss, how-
ever, is the fact that, unlike Doubrovsky, much of Guibert’s writing 
was inspired by the detailed ‘journal intime’ that he kept. Doubrovsky 
did not keep such a diary and therefore was obliged to check facts.42 
Within the wider field of critical analysis, perhaps the most logical 
cause of confusion about the generic status of Guibert’s writing stems 
from the desire of many critics to slot Guibert’s whole oeuvre into one 
simple generic category. As is clear, Guibert’s oeuvre is diverse. Here, 
concentrating upon a limited number of texts, I need now to examine 
in detail the generic status of each. 
A l’ami qui ne m’a pas sauvé la vie (1990), as indicated above, 
was the book that projected Guibert to the status of best selling writer. 
It was also the first of his texts that could easily be categorised as an 
autofiction. This work is written in the first person singular and an 
identitarian relationship is established about a quarter of a way into 
the book, when the narrator tells us that his sister’s child has been 
named ‘Hervé Guibert’, after him (ALA: 72-73). Moreover, the posi-
tioning of a photographic self-portrait of Guibert on the front cover 
                                                 
42 
Boulé does acknowledge the importance of Guibert’s ‘journal intime’ as a re-
source for his writing, but does not compare this with Doubrovsky. See for 
example Boulé (1997a: 37).

Contemporary Life Writing 
120 
strengthens the sense that this work is autobiographical. In true auto-
fictional style, however, despite the clear indications of a referential 
link between the extratextual Guibert and his intratextual self, there 
remains a certain amount of textual space between the two. One obvi-
ous example of this is to be found in the fact that the protagonist of A 
l’ami is also writing a book which may at first sight seem synonymous 
with A l’ami itself, but which is completed some forty pages before 
the end of A l’ami. In an extratextual comment made by Hervé 
Guibert when he appeared on ‘Apostrophes’, he seems neatly to sum 
up the autofictional status of his book. He tells us that 
 
Pour moi tout est vrai dans ce livre, rien ne pouvait être faux dans ce 
livre- là, mais en même temps je trouve que c’est un roman car il y a 
une construction, il y a une suspense qui est mis en place dès la pre-
mière page et qui est mené jusqu’au bout.43  
 
The parallel, here, with Doubrovsky’s insistence that autofiction is 
characterised by the use of a fictional framework through which veri-
fiably real events are narrated, is clear. Patently, then, we can classify 
A l’ami as an autofiction with relative ease. 
Le Protocole compassionnel (1991) and L’Homme au chapeau 
rouge (1992) exhibit a similar generic status to that of A l’ami. In Le 
Protocole compassionnel, for example, the narrative is again written 
in the first person singular, and on two occasions the intratextual ‘je’ 
is identified as ‘Hervé’ (Le PC: 141 and 148). The indications that this 
is an autobiographical text are reinforced by the narrator’s assertion 
that the incredible story that he is telling is strictly true (Le PC: 188). 
The illusion of straightforward referentiality is unsettled, however, 
when the intratextual Guibertian narrator informs us that ‘c’est quand 
ce que j’écris prend la forme d’un journal que j’ai la plus grande im-
pression de fiction’ (Le PC: 103), a comment that causes us to ques-
tion the referentiality of the text we are reading. This is reinforced a 
little later with the words ‘je sens bien qu’ils [mes livres] sont traver-
sés […] par la vérité et le mensonge’ (Le PC: 132). This work, then, 
like A l’ami before it, bears the hallmarks of an autofiction. Moreover, 
the strength of this generic classification is reinforced by the fact that 
continuity is directly implied between the narrator of Le Protocole 
compassionnel and that of A l’ami. On the back cover of Le Protocole 
                                                 
43 
Hervé Guibert speaking on ‘Apostrophes’, 16th March 1990.

Contemporary Life Writing 
121 
compassionnel, for example, the book is introduced as ‘la suite de A 
l’ami qui ne m’a pas sauvé la vie’ and we are told that it contains the 
same characters, including one ‘Hervé Guibert, écrivain malade du 
sida’. In addition, within the book there are references to aspects of 
the extratextual Guibert’s life that would, by the time this was pub-
lished, have been well known.44 Le Protocole compassionnel seems, 
then, not only to be firmly sited within the bounds of autofiction, but 
to represent a continuation of the autofictional life story that began in 
A l’ami. 
L’Homme au chapeau rouge (1992) is again narrated in the first 
person singular, and an identitarian relationship between the author, 
narrator and protagonist is overtly established when we are told that a 
little boy ‘m’appelle monsieur Guibert’ (HCR: 55). Moreover, there 
are references to elements of the extratextual Guibert’s life that would 
not only have been easily verifiable, but relatively well known at the 
time of publication.45 The back cover again overtly signals this book’s 
close relationship with the previous two, telling us that it is ‘le troi-
sième volet de cette histoire personnelle du sida amorcée par A l’ami 
qui ne m’a pas sauvé la vie, et poursuivie dans Le Protocole compas-
sionnel’. The referential ambiguity that is at the heart of the autofic-
tional enterprise is less overly flagged in this work than in its two 
predecessors. It is, however, riddled with references to notions of truth 
and deception, particularly as a result of its foregrounding of the shad-
owy world of art dealing. In fact, on the back cover, we are told that 
‘dès qu’on commence à vouloir parler […] de peinture, on est inévita-
blement confronté à ce problème du vrai et du faux, qui est peut-être 
au cœur de tous les livres d’Hervé Guibert’. There is considerable evi-
dence to suggest, then, that this work is not only autofictional in 
status, but is narrated by the same intratextual ‘Hervé Guibert’ as the 
two previous volumes. 
Most critics take A l’ami, Le Protocole compassionnel and 
L’Homme au chapeau rouge to constitute Guibert’s AIDS trilogy. 
Boulé, however, argues that Cytomégalovirus (1992), the ‘journal 
                                                 
44 
For example, an appearance on Apostrophes is referred to (Le PC: 44) and 
there are several references to the success of Guibert’s last book (Le PC: 141; 
148; 195). 
45 
For example, his occupation as a journalist at Le Monde (HCR: 89), and a 
previously published book entitled Les Chiens (HCR: 57).

Contemporary Life Writing 
122 
d’hospitalisation’ that Guibert published towards the end of his life, 
could be seen to be the true third volume of Guibert’s AIDS trilogy, 
and not L’Homme au chapeau rouge (Boulé 1995a: 7). Boulé’s argu-
ment for this is primarily based on the subject matter of these works. 
He suggests that whereas A l’ami and Le Protocole compassionnel are 
clearly focused upon the narrator’s experience of living with AIDS, 
L’Homme au chapeau rouge takes the art world as its primary focus. 
Cytomégalovirus, Boulé goes on to argue, displays a preoccupation 
with the intratextual Guibert’s health and medical experiences that 
links it strongly with the first two works of the trilogy. What Boulé 
does not discuss, however, is the generic status of these two works. As 
I established above, L’Homme au chapeau rouge is linked to the other 
volumes of the trilogy by its shared status as an autofiction. If its sub-
ject matter is somewhat different from the first two works, then that is 
not to say that the narrator does not remain constant. Cytomégalovirus, 
on the contrary, is labelled ‘journal’ on the front cover and is a much 
shorter work made up of brief passages that correspond strongly with 
the character of a diary rather than a novel. I wish to contend that 
whilst Cytomégalovirus cannot be said to constitute an autofiction, 
and therefore is probably best not classified as belonging to Guibert’s 
AIDS trilogy, it does remain a pertinent object of enquiry. This work 
exhibits clear thematic correspondence with Guibert’s AIDS trilogy, 
including the reappearance of similar characters. What is missing is 
any overt reference to an intention to fictionalise or to contest the 
boundaries of truth and fiction, present in A l’ami, Le Protocole com-
passionnel and L’Homme au chapeau rouge. 
It is pertinent to note that whilst A l’ami, Le Protocole compas-
sionnel and L’Homme au chapeau rouge all contain a sophisticated 
blend of fact and fiction, it seems that at the time of publication of Cy-
tomégalovirus, these two factors were separated out in Guibert’s 
work. That is to say that whereas Cytomégalovirus appears to be ref-
erential and factual, Guibert simultaneously wrote a work that was 
considerably more fictional, entitled Le Paradis (1992). In terms of its 
generic status, Le Paradis is one of Guibert’s most interesting works. 
Like the other works addressed in this study, it is narrated in the first 
person singular. The identity of the narrator is surrounded by confu-
sion however. Late in the book it is hinted that there could be an iden-
titarian relationship between the author, narrator and protagonist as 
there is a reference to ‘Monsieur Hervé Guibert, né le 14/12/55’ (Le P:

Contemporary Life Writing 
123 
120). However, it seems that there is a deliberate attempt to generate 
confusion in this work and a complex blend of contradictory features 
simultaneously point towards both narratorial continuity with Gui-
bert’s AIDS texts and the creation of an entirely fictional narrator and 
main character. For example, familiar characters such as ‘ma grande 
tante Suzanne qui avait été mon amie la plus intime pendant plus de 
vingt ans’ (Le P: 109) recur in this work, alongside familiar themes 
such as an unknown illness and an apparent search for its source. 
However, the protagonist is clearly heterosexual in this work, having a 
relationship with ‘Jayne’, as well as originating from Zurich rather 
than Paris. It seems then that this work transgresses generic bounda-
ries to an even greater extent than Guibert’s other works, even as it 
plays, as Guibert’s writing reiteratively plays, with and between fact 
and fiction. Indicating the complexity of the generic status of this 
work, Michel Braudeau commented in an article in Le Monde,‘même 
si Guibert fait mine quelque temps d’adopter la forme du roman, la 
part de l’autobiographie fait régulièrement surface’ (Braudeau 1993: 
26). 
Why, then, should Guibert have deviated from or taken to its 
very limits the autofictional model established in his AIDS trilogy at 
the very end of his life, and should Le Paradis, the work where he 
does so, be included in a study of his AIDS texts? Perhaps part of the 
answer to this can be found in the study of Guibert’s original, unpub-
lished manuscript of Le Paradis.46 In this, it can be seen that the pro-
tagonist’s lover is not a woman called Jayne, but rather a man called 
Vincent. As Guibertian scholars will know, this is the name of one of 
Guibert’s real life lovers who is the focus of several books, including 
Fou de Vincent (1989). It seems that this name was changed to Jayne, 
and the degree of fictionality of Le Paradis increased, at some point in 
the writing process. An embrace of fictional possibilities is signalled 
too within the text in references to the protagonist’s desire to shrug off 
the straight jacket of singular, unified selfhood. We read, for example 
that ‘je suis un être double, écrivain parfois, rien d’autre les autres 
fois, je voudrais être un être triple, quadruple, un danseur, un gangster, 
un funambule, un peintre, un skieur […]’ (Le P: 115).  A little later, 
the narrator refers to how he has made himself schizophrenic ‘en me 
dédoublant en deux personnages, avec deux adresses différentes, une 
                                                 
46 
Guibert’s manuscripts can be found at the IMEC in Paris.

Contemporary Life Writing 
124 
vraie qui est un prétendu bureau et une fictive d’où l’on me fait suivre 
mon courier’ (Le P: 115). Le Paradis, in the light of all this, cannot 
simply be dismissed as ‘un roman’. Written at the same time as Cy-
tomégalovirus, when Guibert was extremely ill and subject to the 
harsh constraints of the medical establishment, Le Paradis is rather a 
fantastic tale in which Guibert seeks to dissolve and explode all 
boundaries between the lived ‘I’ and the imagined ‘I’. 
Whilst the narrator of this work clearly cannot be treated as a 
stable continuation of the narrator of Guibert’s previous AIDS-related 
autofictions, there is evidence to suggest that Guibert himself wished 
this work to be read alongside his AIDS texts. In a diary entry shortly 
before his death, he referred to it as ‘la suite de L’Homme au chapeau 
rouge’ (Guibert 1993: 23). Le Paradis will, then, constitute a minor 
focus of my study, on the grounds that it is clearly pertinent to Gui-
bert’s AIDS texts and could, in fact, be classified as a ‘fantastic auto-
fiction’. 
 
 
2.4 Régine Robin 
 
Régine Robin is a less well-known writer than Serge Doubrovsky and 
Hervé Guibert, however her work contains significant parallels with 
theirs. Here, I will discuss the salient points of Régine Robin’s career 
and oeuvre as well as characterising her key preoccupations and moti-
vations. I will look at her theoretical and academic interests, before 
going on to establish the generic status of those of her literary works 
that will constitute the focus of my study. 
 
 
Régine Robin’s Personal and Intellectual Background 
 
Régine Robin’s oeuvre is striking in its eclecticism. Born in France in 
December 1939 to recently immigrated Polish Jewish parents, Robin 
began her career as a historian. She completed a thesis on the history 
of the French revolution and taught for some time at a lycée in Lyon 
before moving to the Université de Paris X. After her emigration to 
Quebec in 1977, she worked at various Quebec Universities before se-
curing the position of Professor in the Sociology department at the 
Université de Québec à Montréal in 1982.

Contemporary Life Writing 
125 
A striking feature of Robin’s work is the preoccupation it dis-
plays with two of the major ideological discourses of the twentieth 
century: Communism and Nazism. Both of these movements touched 
Robin personally. Brought up by a Polish Jewish father who re-
nounced his faith and religious tradition in order to campaign actively 
for the communist social order that he believed would finally resolve 
the Jewish question, Robin’s deep and enduring interest in both the 
communist project and the fallout of its collapse is comprehensible. 
Perhaps even more formative for Robin, however, was the experience 
of the danger and stigma of the Nazi occupation of Paris that she ex-
perienced at first hand, and the loss of over fifty relatives in Poland 
during the Holocaust. In a special edition of the journal Études fran-
çaises that focused on ‘Écriture et Judéité au Québec’, Robin tells us: 
‘toute mon oeuvre est sortie de la guerre, du fait d’avoir été marquée 
comme juive par le nazisme et le régime de Vichy’ (Robin 2001c: 
117). Throughout her oeuvre, in works that treat such diverse topics as 
history, the Yiddish language, the city of Berlin, and the Internet, it is 
perhaps unsurprising that the Second World War and questions of 
Jewish identity constitute omnipresent preoccupations. 
Robin’s work is underpinned on a theoretical level by her early 
awareness of the problematic nature of objective, institutionalised his-
torical knowledge that relies upon myths of transparent language and 
representation. Indeed, it seems to have been this awareness that 
prompted Robin to develop a deep interest in interdisciplinarity, and 
to seek new ways of writing History from within the disciplines of 
Literature and Sociology. In particular, Robin’s work manifests a deep 
commitment to the displacement of institutionalised, state-level his-
torical discourse in favour of ‘une histoire autre’ in which the every-
day, grassroots level experience of History can be heard (Robin 1989: 
102). The diversity of Robin’s oeuvre is unified by an enduring inter-
est in the recurring themes of history and memory, language, literature 
and cultural identity. 
Frustrated with the conservatism of classical History, Robin’s 
works display a tendency to undermine the rational conventions of the 
objective scholar by overtly including the personal within even her 
theoretical works. In a recent programme broadcast by Téléquébec on 
the subject of Régine Robin, the presenter argued that

Contemporary Life Writing 
126 
D’ailleurs dans ses fictions comme dans ses études plus «traditionnel-
les», elle se met en scène. Elle ne se fait pas l’apôtre de la «distance 
nécessaire» […] propre aux disciplines dites scientifiques. Certes, on 
voit des spécialistes personnaliser leurs études en avant-propos mais 
peu d’entre eux impliquent autant leur personne dans leurs écrits 
comme le fait Régine Robin.47 
 
There is certainly evidence to suggest that this incorporation of the 
personal into the theoretical and scientific is for Robin the result of a 
deeply held, scholarly belief. Rather like Doubrovsky, she argues that 
‘l’oeuvre théorique est en fait une autobiographie déguisée, ou une au-
tofiction par procuration, un parcours intellectuel qui déplace les af-
fects ou qui joue le rôle d’une pseudo-auto-analyse’ (Robin 1995b: 
98). Her own theoretical works, then, can often be seen to tackle a 
topic that is personally important to her – the Yiddish language or the 
Holocaust, for example – and her theoretical investigations are sup-
ported by a great number of examples and stories drawn from her per-
sonal life. 
Concomitantly, and consistent with her awareness of the prob-
lematic nature of language and representation, Robin possesses a 
highly sophisticated view of autobiography. Extending her theoretical 
repertoire to incorporate literary criticism and experimental autobio-
graphy in particular, she has argued that in her own writings ‘Je 
m’amuse à ne pas prendre l’autobiographie au sérieux, à ne pas me 
laisser piéger par la mémoire collective, celle-là même que je me ré-
approprie’ (Robin 1995b: 101). This view of autobiography may seem 
surprising in view of the strongly personal, autobiographical style of 
all of Robin’s own literary writings. Her first novel, La Québécoite 
(1983), for example, tells the tale of a Parisian woman who is both 
Jewish and an academic, who emigrates to Quebec in order to begin a 
new life there, all of which could be said to apply to Robin herself. 
However, Robin’s critical view of autobiography, grounded in the im-
possibility of representation and the fallibility of memory, does remain 
evident in her literary writings, despite the pre-eminence of the per-
sonal and biographical within them. Indeed, rather than following the 
model of classical autobiography, her literary writings may be said to 
constitute a series of particularly playful, experimental forms of life 
                                                 
47 
http://www.telequebec.qc.ca/idees/chasseurs_idées_1999/archives/20001203/-
theme.html.

Contemporary Life Writing 
127 
writing, the precise generic status of which I will discuss in more de-
tail below. 
As a scholar with a wide range of interests, Robin seems to be 
motivated by a will to transgress long-established disciplinary bounda-
ries in favour of pursuing her own, personal ‘itinéraire intellectuel’. 
Despite her concern with the personal, and the particularly extreme 
events that affected her own life, Robin does not subscribe to a classic, 
factual attempt to write her own life story or that of those around her. 
This can be attributed, at least partially, to the particular difficulties 
posed by the Holocaust in relation to representation and life writing, 
and it is to this that my discussion will now turn. 
Perhaps unsurprisingly, grappling with the complexities of Jew-
ish ethnicity in the aftermath of the Holocaust as well as with her own 
personal struggle to come to terms as a Historian with her decimated 
family and cultural heritage, Robin’s writing project seems to have 
been further complicated by the impact of World War Two and the 
Holocaust on representation itself. In David Carroll’s illuminating 
piece, ‘The Limits of Representation and the Right to Fiction: Shame, 
Literature and the Memory of the Shoah’ (1999), the quandary in 
which many holocaust survivors found themselves after the war is 
highlighted. Carroll’s essay argues that, often feeling an overwhelm-
ing obligation to bear witness for what had happened, many of those 
who escaped the Holocaust simultaneously felt themselves to be ‘un-
worthy witnesses’ due to the shame of having survived in the place of 
another. Indeed, the only complete Holocaust witnesses being dead, 
Carroll argues that survivors’ only option was to bear witness by 
proxy. Drawing on the work of well known holocaust survivors, Car-
roll asserts that whilst Primo Levi associated overwhelming shame 
with only being able to testify by proxy for the dead, writer Jorge 
Semprun, on the contrary, defined his very writing project by what he 
termed ‘PROXY NARRATIVES’ and ‘a shameless reliance on fic-
tion’ (Carroll 1999: 69). Robin seems to display a similar attitude to-
wards the role of fiction in Holocaust remembrance. Directly refuting 
Adorno’s contentious indictment of post-Holocaust fiction, Robin ar-
gues instead that ‘désormais, après Auschwitz, seule la fiction pouvait 
nous parler et nous faire sentir ce passé impensable’ (Robin 1989: 25). 
Overtly disagreeing with the notion that any impulse to fictionalise 
History must necessarily assist those with a bent towards Revisionism, 
Robin instead argues in Le Naufrage du siècle, that, on the contrary,

Contemporary Life Writing 
128 
‘seule la fiction permet de dire du vrai’ (Robin 1995a: 66).48 Fiction, 
then, is seen as the only medium through which to communicate the 
true horror of the unimaginable atrocities of the Holocaust. Further-
more, ‘proxy narratives’ can be seen to constitute the only means by 
which Robin can attempt any form of personal life writing due to the 
fifty-one gaping holes in her family tree and the consequent loss of 
family and cultural history that is crucial to her own sense of self and 
her ‘roman familial’.49 
Commenting on one of her first pieces of literary rather than 
scholarly or theoretical writing, Le Cheval blanc de Lénine (1979), 
Robin tells us: 
 
C’était une première esquisse où la part de la fiction devait nécessai-
rement prendre une place démesurée tout en faisant émerger, par cette 
fiction même, quelque chose de la vérité de cette famille disparue, et 
quelque chose de ma propre vérité. Reconquête identitaire, certes, 
mais dans le déplacement fictionnel, dans la parodie et la distance. Il 
s’agit d’une généalogie imaginaire qui prend de traverse les grands 
mythes de la culture juive. (Robin 1995b: 100-101) 
 
Embracing the fictional as well as the personal in her writing project 
can clearly be seen to constitute a strategy employed by Robin to 
overcome the impossibility of writing a life, the story of which has 
been cut adrift from all that usually anchors identity; homeland, cul-
ture and family memories. 
However, far from simplistically plugging up the gaps of this 
fragmented and imperfect history with some kind of ersatz narrative, 
Robin overtly signals her desire to avoid a false sense of coherence 
and continuity. She tells us that ‘même dans l’écriture romanesque de 
                                                 
48 
The assertion that fiction might aid the efforts of revisionists relies of course 
upon the old association of the factual and referential with the ‘truth’, and the 
fictional, literary and poetic with ‘lies’. As has become evident from my dis-
cussion in this chapter, particularly section 2.1, this is no longer a valid asso-
ciation. 
49 
Robin makes frequent reference to the notion of ‘le roman familial’. She ex-
plains this as ‘[l’] expression créée par Freud pour désigner les fantasmes par 
lesquels le sujet modifie imaginairement ses liens avec ses parents’. She goes 
on to argue that in her own ‘roman familial’, she remains understandably pre-
occupied by the war and by the stories of those members of her family whose 
tragedy is not accounted for in traditional History. See Robin (1995a: 175-
176).

Contemporary Life Writing 
129 
type réaliste, […] pour respecter le fragmentaire, la bribe, il faut une 
écriture de fragments, de dé-liaison, quelque chose qui imite l’onirime 
et l’irréalité’ (Robin 1995b: 103). Indeed, in a particularly revealing 
passage, in which the writer displays a high degree of lucidity about 
her own project, Robin argues that the war has left her with a specific 
‘problème formel, de mise en forme’. She goes on to elucidate that for 
her, the Holocaust has resulted in 
 
L’impossibilité de la totalisation comme dans le roman, tel qu’on 
pouvait écrire au XIXe siècle. Il m’est impossible de raconter une his-
toire qui ait un début, un milieu et une fin. Ce réalisme, cher à G. Lu-
kàcs, signifie que le réel a une consistance, qu’il peut être scientifi-
quement saisi, artistiquement figuré ou figuralisé. Pour moi, il n’y a 
que la cassure, la brisure, la béance qui ne peut être comblée. (Robin 
2001c: 120) 
 
Fiction, then, is not employed by Robin in order to paper over the 
cracks of her incomplete personal and cultural history and to produce 
a complete, rounded narrative. On the contrary, rejecting any possibil-
ity of a ‘totalising’ narrative, of a story with a coherent beginning, 
middle and end, Robin tells us that she aims to experiment with ‘le 
passé probable, le passé possible’ (Robin 1995b: 97). It is on this ex-
perimentation with the probable and the possible that Robin’s writing 
project seems to hang and she often writes several versions of the 
same story within one text. Perhaps if life itself seems to be explicable 
by nothing more than the arbitrary nature of chance survival, then it is 
equally valid to explore what might have happened as what did hap-
pen, and particularly necessary to inscribe doubt and fragility into the 
narrative. 
Robin’s literary project can then be said to be relatively clearly 
defined; she is at once motivated by a personal desire to tell the story 
of her own family and culture and yet is sceptical of the ability of tra-
ditional autobiography and representation to accomplish this. Assert-
ing the primary role played by the fictional and the imaginary in any 
attempt to represent the Holocaust, she proposes to explore possible 
and probable versions of the past and seeks to undermine any coher-
ent, totalising narrative that might attempt to rationalise away that 
which is fundamentally irrational and unsayable. It is of considerable 
interest, however, that despite this clearly defined literary project, her 
writings cannot be said to inhabit one stable genre or literary form. As

Contemporary Life Writing 
130 
I have argued, Serge Doubrovsky’s oeuvre, battling with similar con-
cerns over the impossibility of classical autobiography and the impos-
sibility of separating memory from the imaginary, can be said to settle 
within the relatively stable generic formulation of autofiction. Robin’s 
oeuvre, however, already eclectic in the diversity of her theoretical 
and academic concerns, seems restlessly to explore a diverse range of 
literary genres and textual forms. Relating this to her belief in the im-
portance of the fragmentary, of not filling in and making coherent the 
gaps in history, she tells us: 
 
Je préfère, en conséquence, des formes courtes plutôt que des formes 
longues : le fragment, la nouvelle, le récit, l’aphorisme, la note, la 
chronique, de façon à témoigner de l’impossibilité de faire lien. 
(Robin 2001c: 120) 
 
Encompassing a novel, a book of short stories and an autobiographical 
Internet project, the precise generic positions occupied by each unit of 
Robin’s literary corpus studied here will next be established. Whilst 
there is evidence of considerable overlap and continuity between the 
different elements of Robin’s oeuvre, for the purposes of this work, I 
will distinguish between those writings which may be said to be pri-
marily theoretical or scientific in content and style, and those which 
may be judged to be literary and to constitute some form of experi-
mental life writing project. 
 
 
Robin’s Literary Corpus and Generic Status 
 
The first of what may be termed Robin’s literary writings was pub-
lished in 1983 and was entitled La Québécoite. Bearing the subtitle 
‘roman’, this work has been unproblematically treated as a novel by 
critics such as Rosemary Chapman (2000: 236-269). The book is in-
deed written in a primarily fictional style. It slips away from establish-
ing an autobiographical pact and the narrator’s identity is left ambigu-
ous throughout the text. Indeed, the fragmented style of the opening 
pages postpones the introduction of a ‘stable’ narrator, favouring in-
stead the citation of fragments of speech by different characters, un-
distinguished from the rest of the text by speech marks or other textual 
markings, and undifferentiated from each other. Such a heterogeneous 
writing style suggests an authorial effort to establish a plurivocal, de-

Contemporary Life Writing 
131 
centred text and, as Ralph Sarkonak observes, over the course of the 
book three main narrators emerge; Mortre, an old academic preparing 
his classes on Jewish History, ‘elle’, and ‘the authorial je of the fram-
ing story’ (Sarkonak 1987: 101). None of these narrators, nor any pro-
tagonist in the book, bears the same name as the author and thus fol-
lowing Lejeune’s criteria, no autobiographical pact is set up. 
Within the content of the text, textual invention and fictional 
creation are actively highlighted. On several occasions, the narrator’s 
voice overtly comments on the creative process, at one point calling 
into question the veracity of exactly that which he or she has just nar-
rated with the words ‘tout cela n’est pas crédible’ (Q: 148). The narra-
tor seems to have to battle to control the text, asserting, for example, 
that ‘le texte m’échappe. Je le sens glisser’ (Q: 187). Later on, this 
loss of control is twice blamed on the fictional characters, with the 
narrator, speaking metanarratively as author, telling us ‘ce personnage 
fantôme m’échappe’ (Q: 158) and similarly: ‘je me sens totalement 
pigée par elle’ (Q: 187). Such remarks, then, suggest a text in which 
the strength of the creative process threatens the authorial control: a 
text whose fictional characters, at least apparently, take on a relatively 
autonomous status and direct the story. Clearly, this is the antithesis of 
a rational, chronological autobiography. 
La Québécoite is a text, then, which is labelled ‘roman’; in 
which no identitarian relationship is established between the author, 
narrator and protagonist, and in which attention is overtly drawn to the 
creative process that fuelled it and which it replays. I wish to argue, 
however, that the classification of La Québécoite as a novel is far 
from unproblematic, and that in fact, most easily classifiable as an 
autobiographical novel, it constitutes a particularly innovative form of 
experimental life writing. 
Hinting at potential generic ambiguities, Ralph Sarkonak begins 
his review of this work with the words ‘Régine Robin’s La Québéco-
ite is labelled a novel, that most flexible and loose of genres’ (Sarko-
nak 1987: 100). However, even on a very simple level, it must be ac-
knowledged that, to the informed reader, the overwhelming balance of 
the story points towards correspondence with Robin’s extratextual 
life. La Québécoite tells the story of a French Jew who emigrates to 
Quebec, sets up home in Montréal and earns her living by University 
teaching. This Jewish French woman, we are told, grew up in Paris, in

Contemporary Life Writing 
132 
Belleville (Q: 57), is of Polish origin, and is preoccupied by Central 
Europe, the Second World War and Auschwitz, as well as by the cities 
of Budapest, Prague and Berlin. The ‘je’ of the text speaks five lan-
guages (Q: 42) and is interested in Communism (Q: 132). All these 
specific details chime strikingly with Robin’s extratextual biography 
and so the generic status of this work might be judged to be that of an 
autobiographical novel. 
I wish to contend, however, that a fuller understanding of the 
generic status of La Québécoite is to be gained only when the reader is 
familiar with the rest of Robin’s oeuvre. In a ‘postface’, added to the 
French version of the text when it was republished in 1993, Robin 
tells us: 
 
L’écrivain est voleur de mythes, de mots, d’images, un passeur de 
mémoire fictionnalisée. L’écrivain est un être qui dérange, il est une 
conscience qui problématise l’Histoire. (Q: 221) 
 
As I argued above, one of the key preoccupations of Robin’s oeuvre is 
to undermine institutionalised History and to experiment with the pos-
sible and the probable. The predominance of the conditional tense 
within this novel seems to suggest that this is what the author is seek-
ing to do, and indeed, the storyline centres around three possible ver-
sions of the same story. Faced with the erasure of the author’s family 
and cultural heritage that would anchor her into a society and a tradi-
tion, perhaps this work could be seen as an innovative form of life 
writing that swims in the possible and the fragmented rather than the 
stable and the rational. In addition to her rejection of rational, institu-
tional History, it seems that Robin also refutes the notion of the singu-
larity of selfhood and identity that normally underpins life writing. 
Robin seems to suggest that no conventional form of life writing 
would be adequate in order to inscribe the plurality that she feels is at 
the basis of selfhood. She tells us that ‘le roman, je l’ai toujours sou-
tenu, est le seul type de discours permettant non seulement la poly-
phonie […] ; [mais c’est] le seul encore qui permette de dire une cho-
se et son contraire’ (Robin 1989: 86). Embracing the plural, as well as 
the fictional and the imaginary in her literary writing, then, may in fact 
represent a search for textual forms in which the heterogeneity and 
plurality of identity – her own identity included – can be heard rather 
than representing a move away from her autobiographical concerns.

Contemporary Life Writing 
133 
So, drawing together these arguments, I would contend that de-
spite the absence of an autobiographical pact in La Québécoite and the 
inclusion within the text of overt indicators of the presence of inven-
tion and fictionalisation, it is inadvisable to see this text as a simple 
novel. Rather, it may be seen to be a logical outcome of Robin’s de-
sire to weave plurality into her writing, as well as to unsettle that clas-
sical History that would produce a coherent, complete narrative out of 
even the most exceptional events. Demonstrating considerable paral-
lels with Robin’s extratextual life, perhaps this work might be seen to 
be a corollary of Robin’s desire to experiment with the possible and 
probable past, with uncertainty inscribed at every level. Particularly 
helpful, then, is Dawn Thompson’s review of the English language 
version of this work, entitled The Wanderer, in which Thompson tells 
us that ‘according to Robin’s afterword, the novel is autobiographical, 
but on an intellectual or spiritual, rather than factual, level’ (Thomp-
son 2001: 168). 
The next of Robin’s works that could be said to be literary 
rather than theoretical in its scope was published in 1996 and was enti-
tled L’Immense Fatigue des pierres. This work, rather than being sub-
titled ‘roman’, displays the appellation ‘biofictions’. The quatrième de 
couverture, after initially labelling the work ‘un roman’, goes on to 
explain the underlying premises of the text and of the notion of 
‘biofictions’. We are told: 
 
L’Immense Fatigue des pierres. Des biofictions, des vies inventées, 
des itinéraires recomposés qui nous entraînent dans un univers à la li-
mite du rêve. Une écriture éclatée qui ne dédaigne pas Internet et 
Compuserve et qui dit, dans un langage postmoderne, le drame d’un 
génocide, l’anéantissement d’une famille, et ses conséquences sur une 
lignée brisée qui n’arrive plus à se reconstituer. (IFP, back cover) 
 
So, this exegetic paratextual passage indicates that the book it de-
scribes seeks to construct a number of fictional biographies of in-
vented lives that will tell the story of genocide and a destroyed family. 
The complex blend of fiction and fact contained in this work is indi-
cated in an article published by Robin in the volume entitled Écriture 
de soi et trauma (1998) edited by Jean-François Chiantaretto. In this, 
in a footnote to her main argument, Robin tells us: ‘voici un exemple 
qui bien que figurant dans mon dernier recueil de fiction L’Immense 
Fatigue des pierres […] est un exemple réel’ (Robin 1998: 128). So,

Contemporary Life Writing 
134 
whilst the paratextual passage on the back cover of L’Immense Fa-
tigue des pierres contains no indication that the lives to be recounted 
are anything other than fictional, it is clear that the reader must look 
deeper. Indeed, the reader familiar with Robin’s oeuvre will be aware 
of the importance of the destruction of her family during the Holo-
caust and it is around the missing fifty-one members of Robin’s own 
family that this work is structured. In an extratextual discussion of 
L’Immense Fatigue des pierres Robin explains: 
 
Savoir exactement ce qu’on ne doit pas faire. Une écriture liée, susci-
tant l’émotion, jouant sur l’identification, la complaisance. Ne refaire 
ni Schwartz-Bart, ni Elie Wiesel, ni Marek Halter. Ce serait pire. Tout 
le monde n’est pas Celan. Nous nous contenterons de peu. Méditer sur 
l’arbre généalogique, trouver le moyen de redonner une place à ces 
cinquante et une ombres qu’elle n’a pas connues. (Robin 1995b: 103) 
 
Beginning with the intention of in some way bearing witness for the 
fifty-one members of her family who disappeared during the war, 
Robin affirms that her project is very definitely not to produce an 
emotive, coherent and complete text. Rather, highlighting the impos-
sibility of remembering her family, she voices the rhetorical question 
– who can even remember the names of those members of her family 
who were only babies when they were killed (IFP: 170)? Seeking re-
course, then, to the only appropriation of her past that is available to 
her – that of the literary, the imaginary and the fictional, L’Immense 
Fatigue des pierres again constitutes for Robin a meditation on what 
might have happened, this ‘passé probable, passé possible’. Clearly 
concerned as it is with elements related to Robin’s own life, what 
might be said to be the precise generic status of this work labelled 
‘biofictions’? 
Divided into seven independent short stories, L’Immense Fa-
tigue des pierres is a book in which the plural and the shifting are cer-
tainly given pride of place. Each story has a different generic status, 
the stories becoming gradually more overtly autobiographical as the 
book progresses. The opening story, bearing the same name as the 
book itself, comprises a dialogue between a mother and daughter. 
Their voices are not clearly distinguished but rather blur into plurivo-
cality, the narrative voice being passed between them. No autobio-
graphical pact is established, since neither bears the name Régine 
Robin. The text playfully juxtaposes easily identifiable autobiographi-

Contemporary Life Writing 
135 
cal elements, including concern with the war and Jewishness, Mont-
real and Paris, with an overt denial that the main character is a repre-
sentation of authorial selfhood. The narrator tells us: ‘j’ai vieilli la mè-
re. Par rapport à moi, évidemment. Elle a plus de soixante ans. Cela 
écartera les malentendus avec vous lecteur et les tentations de projec-
tions chez moi’ (IFP: 42). 
In a similarly playful manner, the second story, ‘le Dibbouk in-
connu’, is immediately distanced from Robin by the positioning of the 
narrator as ‘il’. We do, however, learn that the narrator’s little sister 
was called Rivka and thus we can infer that on some level this text 
might constitute an imaginary (auto)biography written by Robin’s 
brother and grounded in the fantasy that she was deported to a concen-
tration camp at a very young age. 
The third, fourth and fifth stories seem to move towards the 
sphere of autobiography, with varying degrees of thematic linkage 
with the extratextual life of Robin. The characters of these stories are 
not identified with Robin through any nominal relationship, but rather 
through their key preoccupations with that which we know to apply to 
Robin herself. Story three, for example, entitled ‘L’Agenda’ and writ-
ten in the third person singular, posits a protagonist who has spent 
considerable time working on Kafka, has lived in Paris, and has kept 
detailed diaries of her activities, all of which mirrors details that Robin 
has provided about herself in other works. The narrator of ‘Gratok. 
Langue de vie et langue de mort’, which is again written in the third 
person singular, tells the tale of a small Jewish girl from Belleville, 
Paris, who is forced to hide in a garage during the Occupation, a story 
which Robin implies to have been her own experience in one of her 
pre-existing theoretical works (Robin 1995a: 119). Similarly, the in-
tratextual little girl is posited as having a father who spent the war as a 
prisoner in Germany under a false name and a mother who worked in 
a sewing workshop, escapes the ‘vel d’hiv’ raid by a hair’s breadth, 
and who searches for her family in Poland after the war. 
The sixth short story of this collection is one in which identity 
confusion is overtly, if playfully, highlighted. The narrative of ‘Jour-
nal de déglingue entre le Sélect et le Compuserve’, which is written in 
the first person singular, is primarily concerned with mistaken iden-
tity. A woman with a strong American accent, who turns out to be 
called Emilia Morgan, accosts the protagonist in a bistro, asking her if

Contemporary Life Writing 
136 
she is Pamela Wilkinson. The key character playfully says yes and 
masquerades as this unknown artist for the duration of their business 
meeting (IFP: 138). This story is one in which Régine Robin is in-
tratextually present for the first time. The key character is at one stage 
asked if she is Régine Robin, for example, a possibility that she de-
nies, replying ‘non, vous faites erreur. Je m’appelle Martha Himmel-
farb mais je connais Régine Robin. Elle était ici il y a très peu de 
temps. Elle est partie pour aller chez Tschann...’ (IFP: 151). Indeed, it 
seems that the Régine Robin of this story owns a shop that provides a 
false-biography writing service! Towards the end of the story, the nar-
rator further confuses the identitarian issue, telling us: 
 
Moi, je suis Pamela Wilkinson, ou Emilia Morgan, ou Nancy Nibor, 
ou Martha Himmelfarb, ou les alias du personnage quand elle prend 
part à des forums de discussion sur Compuserve ou sur Internet; Je 
suis peut-être la fille de la narratrice, ou même Régine Robin, si vous 
voulez. Mais laissez moi, vous m’embêtez à la fin, vous voyez bien 
qu’il est tard. Il faut absolument que je m’achète un paquet de Saint 
Moritz Menthol. (IFP: 157-158) 
 
It is clear, then, that the author’s desire in this story is to question 
identity, to leave the narrator’s identity open and ambiguous, and to 
continually unsettle the reader with a farcical, shifting narrative. 
The final story, ‘Manhattan Bistro’, which is again narrated in 
the first person singular, is the most clearly referential of the six. In 
this, the narrator is imagining and planning the book that she wishes to 
write as a sequel to Le Cheval blanc de Lénine, one of Robin’s own 
works. The narrator tells us that this would be a genealogical novel, 
‘un texte autour de la famille, son légendaire et surtout ces cinquante 
et une cases, noms, places qui me manquent’ (IFP: 175). This would 
seem, then, to be a metanarrative commentary upon the very book in 
which it occurs. The narrator imagines the first chapter to take place in 
the conditional tense, something which is partially true of the first 
chapter of L’Immense Fatigue des pierres, and says that it would aim 
to constitute ‘une mémoire probable, plausible. Une autre vie possi-
ble’ (IFP: 177). There is detailed speculation within the narrative 
about what would have happened to the narrator’s maternal and pater-
nal families if they had emigrated to the US rather than either remain-
ing in Poland or emigrating to France. There is a relatively clear auto-
biographical pact established in this chapter, as the two sides of the

Contemporary Life Writing 
137 
narrator’s family are named ‘Ajzerstejn’ and ‘Segalik’ (IFP: 177), the 
names of Robin’s own family. Moreover, speculating on the fate of all 
the family members who would have led full lives rather than being 
killed in the Holocaust, the narrator comments ‘et Rivka, là-dedans. 
Rivka/moi. Rien ne change. Je suis née le 10 décembre 1939 à New 
York’ (IFP: 180). Furthermore, reducing confusion about her own 
complicated nominal status, we are told: ‘rien ne change et tout chan-
ge. Le nom d’abord. Rivka Ajzerstejn n’est pas devenue Régine Ro-
bin, mais Rebecca Ajerstein (prononcer Ajerstin). Une Américaine’ 
(IFP: 180). 
It is clear, then, that the generic status of L’Immense Fatigue 
des pierres is highly intricate. It becomes progressively more referen-
tial, although it is only in the last story that a clear autobiographical 
pact is established. Throughout the other stories, there are numerous 
themes that seem to hint at an autobiographical link with the author, 
but this is cloaked in varying degrees of ambiguity and playful denial. 
As with much of Robin’s work, there is a high degree of intertextual 
self-referentiality between the individual units that constitute her oeu-
vre. As we see this, the clues to the enduringly autobiographical na-
ture of even that which appears to be fictional proliferate. Combining 
her desire for plural, plurivocal writing and a non-totalising inscription 
of the past, the nature of this work is perhaps illuminated most effec-
tively in Robin’s assertion that 
 
le passé n’existe tout simplement pas, pas même la mémoire distor-
due. Le passé est vraiment une reconstruction de représentations, ima-
ginaires non pas à partir de traces, mais à partir de fantasmes et 
d’actualisation de ces fantasmes. (Robin 1997b: 142) 
 
Feeling that the only possible appropriation of her past is in the imagi-
nary, the literary, and the fictional, Robin develops the genre of 
‘biofictions’ in an attempt to decentre the text away from herself 
whilst still writing about that topic that is most important to her own 
identity, ‘le roman familial’. 
The final piece of writing that will constitute a focus of my 
readings is Papiers perdus, Robin’s autobiographical Internet project. 
The homepage that Robin authors is divided into two principal sec-
tions, the first of which is entitled ‘la branche universitaire’, and 
which consists of her CV, lists of publications and research interests.

Contemporary Life Writing 
138 
We are introduced to the second branch with the following words: 
‘une seconde avenue, Rivka A, vous donnera accès à une expérimen-
tation autobiographique éclatée sur le web’. It is on the latter branch 
that my analysis will focus. 
Key to understanding the generic status of this Internet project 
is its division, apparently mirroring that of the author, into two sec-
tions. Indeed, it is important to note that whilst the branch dealing 
with Robin’s university and research career is attributed to ‘Régine 
Robin’, the autobiographical section is associated with her other 
name, ‘Rivka A’. The autobiographical part is itself divided into sec-
tions. We are told that in the latter, this ‘construction autobiographi-
que par fragments’, ‘Rivka’, ‘mon double’ is at the keyboard. If Ré-
gine Robin, then, is a name to which can be ascribed a detailed CV in-
cluding a lengthy list of publications, then ‘Rivka’ is a personal, pub-
licly less known figure. Indeed, it seems that the purpose of this Inter-
net site is to explore this lesser known side of Robin’s personality: 
‘cette Rivka qu’il me faut apprendre à mieux connaître’. Within one of 
the fragments of these texts, the author clarifies that at school she was 
known as Régine, and at home Rivkale. She tells us ‘cette Rivkale, 
c’est toi petite et puis c’est toi dans la fiction’. 
How, then, are we to approach this fragmented collection of 
texts, in which the subject alternates between a ‘je’, an ‘elle’ a ‘tu’, 
and a ‘nous’? This fragmentation can be more accurately seen as a re-
flection of Robin’s complex and divided sense of self, and of her de-
sire to inscribe plurality into everything she does, rather than as a 
symptom of a move away from autobiography. Indeed, in one particu-
lar text entitled ‘Mail de soi’, she tells us: 
 
L’autobiographie ou le geste autobiographique ne pourrait se penser 
aujourd’hui que dans le fragmentaire, le disparate, l’hétérogène, 
confronté à la mort des grands récits, en particulier du récit de soi. Le 
soi ne serait plus pensable en dehors de sa division de son ou de ses 
clivages. (Mail de soi) 
 
The most generically unproblematic of her literary writings, then, is 
constituted by Robin’s Internet site. Here, Robin seems to provide us 
with the greatest clarifications of her names and her writing projects. 
Illuminating the link between Régine and Rivka, a connection that 
lingers unresolved in her other writings, she furthermore provides us 
with what seemingly constitutes an explanation of the enduring pres-

Contemporary Life Writing 
139 
ence of autobiographical themes within her work, coupled with her 
repeated avoidance of an autobiographical pact. She tells us, that in 
order to avoid the confusion of autobiography she prefers to adopt the 
notion of ‘biographèmes’ in the Barthesian sense.50 Understanding this 
as the themes that sum up a life, a little later in the same text she tells 
us ‘mes biographèmes sont récurrents: le drapeau rouge, le rapport à 
mon nom propre et à mes papiers d’identité, les bistrots’. 
It is of paramount importance to note that what is Robin’s most 
generically stable and clearly autobiographical text by far is the one 
which she has chosen to formulate as an Internet project. Arguably, 
because the Internet is already such a provisional and unstable locus 
of inscription, one that is utterly fragmented and decentred, it com-
plies with Robin’s writing project much more closely than the power-
ridden and established logocentric medium of the book. Indeed, on the 
Internet, Robin gives us precise information not only on how to read 
her online texts, but also on her other works, thus enabling her site to 
perform a paratextual and metanarrative exegetic function. In view of 
her provision of all this information, it is necessary to ask to what ex-
tent my reading of Robin’s work will comply with the framework that 
she established for us with her own authorial reading model. 
Reflecting the notion that particular ‘biographèmes’ are present 
and recurrent across Robin’s oeuvre, my reading of these texts will 
rely on the premise that some continuity may be detected across the 
three texts I shall study. Indeed, for all that they are labelled ‘roman’, 
‘biofictions’ and ‘expérimentation autobiographique’ respectively, I 
will go so far as to resist Robin’s attempt to encourage us to see these 
works as separate units, each with an entirely separate individual ge-
neric status. I will, instead, argue that the concern of these three texts 
is primarily the same; that all inscribe Robin’s identity as that of a 
French Jewish academic whose subjectivity has been unsettled by the 
major ideological context of the twentieth century. And I will argue 
that in all of them, she wishes to produce a textual inscription of those 
members of her family whom she has outlived, thus recreating her 
                                                 
50 
Robin herself quotes Barthes at length in order to define the notion of ‘bi-
ographèmes’. She cites Barthes as asserting that ‘j’aimerais que ma vie se ré-
duisît, par les soins d’un biographe amical et désinvolte, à quelques détails, à 
quelques goûts, à quelques inflexions, disons des « biographèmes »’. See Ré-
gine Robin, Papiers perdus, fragment entitled ‘mes biographèmes’.

Contemporary Life Writing 
140 
‘roman familial’. The significant degree of recycling and repetition of 
themes and stories across these individual units decreases the degree 
of problematisation implicated in conceiving of them as a single cor-
pus. 
 
 
2.5 Life Writing: The Space of This Project 
 
In this monograph, then, a selected range of contemporary life writing 
texts written by Serge Doubrovsky, Hervé Guibert and Régine Robin 
will be addressed. As my readings proceed, ‘French autobiography’ 
per se will not be my focus. Rather, the terrain of enquiry can be cir-
cumscribed as that of a range of experimental life writing texts that are 
united by a desire to play with the conventions of autobiography, and 
by a persistent, if often problematic, affiliation with France and the 
French language.51 Within that terrain, aspects of the life writings dis-
cussed will be brought into dialogue with the conceptual issues ad-
dressed in chapter 1. This study will proceed, in other words, to dis-
cuss the articulations of home space and cultural belonging in the se-
lected works of each of these three writers individually, before mov-
ing on in chapter 6 to a comparative discussion of the extent to which 
these works could be considered to represent forms of ‘postmodern 
cartography’. Attesting to the intention of this monograph to bring lit-
erature into dialogue with theory, the structure – and order – of these 
chapters has been determined by the literature itself. That is to say that 
the vision of home space offered by each set of texts will become pro-
gressively more complex through the chapters. Chapter 3 will com-
                                                 
51 
The term ‘experimental’ is argued by some critics to be problematic as it may 
represent a conservative way of excluding unusual literature from the main-
stream. Alfred Hornung, taking these arguments on board, suggests that for 
greater clarity terms such as ‘avant-garde’ should be used. Whilst Hornung’s 
argument is certainly not without truth, his easy association of the ‘avant-
garde’ and the ‘postmodern’ is more difficult to accept. This monograph will 
not adopt the term ‘avant-garde’ due to the complexity of this notion’s rela-
tionship with the postmodern. In fact, the relation between the historical 
avant-garde and the postmodern is one which is highly contested and discus-
sion of which is impossible in this study due to space restrictions. For a dis-
cussion of Hornung’s reservations about the term ‘experimental’, however, 
see Hornung (1992). For a more extensive discussion of postmodernism and 
the avant-garde, see Murphy (1999).

Contemporary Life Writing 
141 
prise a discussion of the autofictional writings of Hervé Guibert, 
works that display a preoccupation primarily with a single, French 
home space, albeit one that is compared and contrasted with a few 
‘exotic’ spaces. The order of the two subsequent chapters, treating the 
writings of Serge Doubrovsky and Régine Robin in turn, will be dic-
tated by the proliferation and increasing complexity of the conception 
of home spaces that these works display. For Doubrovsky, considered 
in chapter 4, home space is articulated as ineluctably and painfully di-
vided between the US and France. For Régine Robin, in chapter 5, 
home space is apparently articulated as divided between France and 
the US, but is further complicated by the spectre of a lost East Euro-
pean ghetto, the inhabitants and cultural heritage of which have been 
erased without trace. After a detailed analysis of the articulations of 
home space and cultural belonging in the works of each of these three 
writers, chapter 6 will bring the discussion back to a more overt dia-
logue with the notions of postmodern space that were elaborated in 
chapter 1. Here, I will investigate the extent to which the life writings 
of Guibert, Doubrovsky and Robin can be said to constitute maps 
through which the postmodern world can be better negotiated and un-
derstood. That is to say, chapter 6 will seek to establish to what extent 
life writing can be said to represent a form of ‘postmodern cartogra-
phy’.

3. 
Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
 
 
3.0 Introduction: Cultural Production; Cultural Turmoil; Spatial Myths 
 
The publication of the first of Hervé Guibert’s AIDS texts, the focus 
of this chapter, marked a definitive moment in Guibert’s career. They 
were the sources of the literary recognition, albeit accompanied by 
controversy and scandal, that he had long sought. Moreover, in addi-
tion to their impact upon the French literary arena, these works also 
had a major effect upon French national perceptions of AIDS, famil-
iarising large sections of the French population with the day-to-day 
minutiae of living with the syndrome, as well as challenging the mani-
fold myths and stereotypes that dogged people with AIDS at this time. 
In wider terms, the critical role of culture and cultural produc-
tion in both constituting and understanding the AIDS crisis is increas-
ingly clear. There is growing recognition, for example, that rather than 
designating a singular, concrete reality, which has been transparently 
labelled by objective biomedical discourse, the meaning of ‘AIDS’, or 
‘le sida’, is culturally negotiated. In this, both the signified and the 
signifier are seen to be constructed within existing social and cultural 
ideologies. As critic Paula Treichler argues, even supposedly impartial 
scientific research into AIDS ‘exists within a heavily populated social, 
cultural and ideological territory’ (Treichler 1988: 56). Drawing upon 
pre-existing cultural stereotypes and assumptions in order to under-
stand the unknown, the threatening and the urgent, then, it is clear that 
even ‘objective’ medico-scientific discourses must be acknowledged 
as constructed within the realm of ‘culture’: the same circuit of ex-
change in which popular opinion and artistic representations of AIDS 
have been formulated. 
Far from being subsumed and controlled by culture, however, 
AIDS has challenged the very underlying premises on which culture 
functions. Highlighting the impossibility of representation, for exam-

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
144 
ple, AIDS is accused by critics of swamping texts by becoming sub-
ject, object and even language of representation, and in this way gen-
erating an ‘epidemic of signification’ and a plague of discourse.1 As 
Douglas Crimp argues, ‘AIDS intersects with and requires a critical 
rethinking of all of culture: of language and representation, of science 
and medicine, of health and illness, of sex and death, of the public and 
the private realms’ (Crimp 1988: 15). AIDS is, then, both culturally 
constructed and culturally disruptive, presenting particular challenges 
to the pre-existing premises and underlying structures on which cul-
ture functions. 
It is imperative to recognise that cultural responses to the syn-
drome have been heavily dependent upon particular understandings of 
space. Especially striking in early cultural responses to AIDS, con-
temporaneous with Guibert’s writing, were the geopolitically and geo-
culturally dependent founding myths which sought to explain the syn-
drome’s origins. The most widely disseminated of the manifold myths 
about the origins of AIDS, for instance, variously implicated US bio-
logical warfare scientists seeking to control African population 
growth; USSR scientists trying to fell their Cold War enemy, the US; 
African people and green monkeys, sometimes accused of undertaking 
‘primitive’ rituals or bestiality and thus infecting the West; the 
(homo)sexual practices of Haitians infecting US tourists; and those in 
the ‘degenerate’ West inflicting the syndrome on Asia. Accompanied 
by many less well-known but similarly spatially-infused myths of 
blame,2 these narratives were often not merely reinforced but actively 
sanctioned by state-instigated measures to control and restrict the 
movement of peoples from outside their own borders. Similarly, there 
are many examples of disproportionately extensive measures to con-
duct HIV tests on immigrants rather than native citizens. 
In short, as Susan Sontag notably argues in her seminal essay 
AIDS and its Metaphors (1988), dominant reactions to the advent of 
AIDS have drawn upon age-old cultural understandings of plague as 
                                                 
1 
For a discussion of this see Poirier (1993: 1-7).  For discussion of the term 
‘epidemic of signification’ see Treichler (1988). For a discussion of ‘plague of 
discourse’ see Edelman (1988).  
2 
For example, Kenya has made accusations towards Uganda; Zambia has 
blamed the Indian doctors who replaced colonial ones for being less compe-
tent (Sabatier 1988: 103-105).

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
145 
that which comes from elsewhere and is transmitted by foreigners. 
Conceiving of the national space as a ‘body’ whose existence is 
threatened by the invasion of its individual constituent bodies, early 
cultural responses to AIDS demonstrated an almost universal impulse 
to re-establish the threatened borders between healthy inside and dis-
eased outside at a national level. These attempts to explain the inex-
plicable and control the uncontrollable demonstrated a cultural re-
sponse heavily dependent on notions of cultural belonging and space, 
which sought to blame the foreigner. Renée Sabatier’s argument that 
‘for centuries, the reflex response to plague and pestilence has been to 
bar strangers from the city gates’ (Sabatier 1988: 103) seems strik-
ingly pertinent. Indeed, harnessed particularly by right wing interest 
groups, the AIDS crisis not only elicited culturally protectionist re-
sponses with regard to immigration and those perceived as foreign, 
but was also directly employed in order to question the very nature of 
nation, home, and the contemporary pluralities and diverse behaviours 
that have become increasingly visible in Western cultural spaces. 
Bearing in mind the clearly spatial terrain upon which all cul-
tural responses to AIDS are played out, then, and the fundamental 
questions that the crisis has generated about sense of belonging and 
national identity, I will now turn to an in-depth examination of the 
role of space within Guibert’s AIDS texts.3 This topic has been the fo-
cus of no sustained study and has remained under-explored by critics. 
Analysis of the minimal critical commentary that exists on this topic 
                                                 
3 
As I argued in chapter 2, in this study my definition of Guibert’s AIDS texts 
will be larger than most. I will discuss A l’ami qui ne m’a pas sauvé la vie 
(1990); Le Protocole compassionnel (1991); L’Homme au chapeau rouge 
(1992); Cytomégalovirus (1992) and Le Paradis (1992). As I also discussed in 
chapter 2, the nature of autofictional writing means that no simple correspon-
dence can be assumed between the author and the ‘Hervé Guibert’ found 
within the texts. In order to avoid occluding the gap between author and narra-
tor-protagonist, the former will be referred to simply by name – Hervé Guibert 
– whereas the latter will be signalled by the use of inverted commas – ‘Hervé 
Guibert’ – or referred to as ‘the autofictionally rendered Hervé Guibert’. 
Moreover, as discussed in chapter 2, whilst the ‘Hervé Guibert’ to be found in 
the first three of the AIDS texts listed above could be judged to be a relatively 
stable construction of selfhood across all three volumes, being united by the 
same generic status as well as a strong intertext, this cannot be said to be true 
for the latter two works. When the ‘Hervé Guibert’ of Cytomégalovirus or Le 
Paradis is referred to, then, this will be prefaced by an indication that this nar-
rator is distinct to this work, i.e. ‘Cytomégalovirus’s ‘Hervé Guibert’’.

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
146 
demonstrates the existence of intriguing contradictions. Jean-Pierre 
Boulé, an academic who has dedicated a significant amount of his 
work to studying Guibert’s oeuvre, for example, argues that ‘space in 
the novels is open. The narrator travels to Italy, including Elba and 
Rome; Tunisia; Japan; America. By taxi, tube and aeroplane’ (Boulé 
1995a: 45). Literary critic Brad Epps, however, suggests quite the op-
posite, arguing that ‘chez Guibert l’espace lui-même est souvent con-
traint et contraignant’ (Epps 1997: 61). In order to address rigorously 
the topic of space in Guibert’s autofictional AIDS writing, I will 
firstly seek to establish what could be characterised as spaces of home 
and cultural belonging within Guibert’s work. I will then move on to 
investigate the wider topic of how Guibert’s autofictionally rendered 
double is placed within cultural space through examining the major 
spatial leitmotifs that may be detected within the AIDS texts. Finally, 
I will examine the way ‘Hervé Guibert’’s understanding of and inter-
action with international space is portrayed as altered by his diagnosis 
with AIDS. 
 
 
3.1 Spaces of Cultural Belonging and Home: Paris, Rome and Elba 
 
The site most clearly associated with the intratextual, and indeed the 
extratextual, Guibert is clearly that of Paris. Early in A l’ami,4 Guibert 
posits his autofictionally rendered self as living at ‘203 rue du Bac’ 
(ALA: 29). Even a cursory glance at Guibert’s AIDS texts reveals that 
the precise location of this home within the space of Paris is far from 
arbitrary. On the contrary, situated as it is in the 7th arrondissement, it 
seems to interpellate some key aspects of ‘Hervé Guibert’’s identity. 
For example, it is situated firmly on the Parisian Left Bank, a space 
heavily imbued with connotations of the French intellectual and cul-
tural elite.5 This association is reinforced by the revelation that ‘Hervé 
                                                 
4 
The following abbreviations for the titles of primary texts will be adhered to 
in this chapter: ALA (Hervé Guibert, A l’ami qui ne m’a pas sauvé la vie [Pa-
ris: Gallimard, 1990]); Le PC (Hervé Guibert, Le Protocole compassionnel 
[Paris: Gallimard, 1991]); HCR (Hervé Guibert, L’Homme au chapeau rouge 
[Paris: Gallimard, 1992]); C (Hervé Guibert, Cytomégalovirus [Paris: Seuil, 
1992]);  Le P (Hervé Guibert, Le Paradis [Paris: Gallimard, 1992]). 
5 
A cursory glance at a guidebook insists upon the Bohemian, dissident, intel-
lectual nature of the Left Bank and its history as the locale in which great

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
147 
Guibert’’s neighbour and close friend is none other than Muzil, a 
character bearing strong resemblance to the renowned French intellec-
tual, Michel Foucault.6 The areas of Paris that Guibert’s autofictional 
double inhabits are certainly those of the culturally privileged in 
which chance meetings with important people occur. In L’Homme au 
chapeau rouge, for example, ‘Hervé Guibert’ twice bumps into Fran-
cis Bacon. Firstly, we are told, ‘un beau matin froid, je le croisai rue 
Saint-Antoine’ (HCR: 57) and later, ‘un soir au Flore, je tombai par 
hasard sur lui’ (HCR: 57). As Derek Duncan argues, ‘Hervé Guibert’ 
demonstrates loyalty to and affinity with ‘une coterie d’élite parisi-
enne, artistique et intellectuelle’ (Duncan 1995: 101), an observation 
which is clearly supported by analysis of the spaces in which he is cast 
as moving. 
The location of Guibert’s autofictional double within the heart 
of French cultural space is reinforced by his frequent narrative refer-
ences to well-known, value-laden spaces of French gastronomy. The 
restaurant ‘La Coupole’,7 for example, located on the Boulevard du 
Montparnasse, frequently recurs in Guibert’s narrative (Le PC: 63; 
131; 140; HCR: 18-19; 42). Similarly, there are references to eating at 
‘Le Sélect’ (Le PC: 13; 27), known to be a particularly traditional and 
authentic example of the literary cafés located on the ‘boulevard du 
Montparnasse’ (Baillie and Salmon 1997:132 and 260). An additional 
dimension to the autofictionally rendered Guibert’s relationship with 
space can be identified in terms of his occupation of spaces closely as-
sociated with male homosexuality. As Heathcote, Hughes and Wil-
liams assert, since the Second World War, gay culture in France has 
been primarily associated with Paris, the privileged home city of 
‘Hervé Guibert’. Within this, the Marais area has been the centre of 
                                                                                                         
thinkers, painters and writers were traditionally to be found. Indeed, the 
Rough Guide tells us that ‘it is here, still, that the city’s mythmakers princi-
pally gather: the writers, painters, philosophers, politicians, journalists, de-
signers – the people who tell Paris what it is’ (Baillie and Salmon 1997: 109). 
6 
Indeed, Emily Apter asserts that it is in this elite sector of Parisian life that 
both the extratextual Guibert and his intratextual self lived, arguing that 
Guibert came of age in ‘the Paris of Roland Barthes and Michel Foucault’ 
(Apter 1993: 84). 
7 
To cite a tourist guide to Paris, ‘La Coupole’ is labelled ‘the largest and per-
haps the most famous and enduring arty-chic Parisian hang-out for dining, 
dancing and debate’ (Baillie and Salmon 1997: 260).

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
148 
gay activity since the 1970s (Heathcote, Hughes and Williams 1998b: 
9-10), and this is a space that ‘Hervé Guibert’ frequents (ALA: 189). 
In fact, a pertinent link can be drawn here between the ways in 
which ‘Hervé Guibert’ is presented as establishing a sense of belong-
ing in particular spaces that correspond with his identity, and 
Bourdieu’s theory of culture. Central to his arguments about ‘habitus’ 
and cultural capital is the hypothesis that rather than being decided by 
innate qualities, cultural privilege is actively asserted by individuals 
through the position taking that they choose to undertake. In ‘Hervé 
Guibert’’s case, this ‘position-taking’ is evident in his spatial prefer-
ences. That is to say that his cultural identity as a writer and journalist 
is cast as reflected in his apparent sense of belonging in the well-
known spaces of the artistic and literary crème de la crème. Moreover, 
through his occupation of these spaces, it could be said that ‘Hervé 
Guibert’’s ‘cultural capital’ is reinforced as it is here that he is flagged 
as mixing with some of the most highly respected figures of the con-
temporary cultural scene, thereby acquiring the necessary ‘marks of 
distinction’ to separate him from the crowd.8 In his naming of many 
spaces of gastronomy, references, all, to an ultra-French cultural tradi-
tion, the narrator is established as moving not merely within culturally 
elite spaces, but within French cultural spaces, and is thus linked with 
the long tradition of famous French intellectuals and great thinkers. 
The space of cultural belonging of ‘Hervé Guibert’, can, then, be 
clearly identified to be geographically that of the Parisian Left Bank, 
intersecting with the established cultural spaces of the Parisian, gay 
and artistic elites. 
This privileged location within the heart of the French artistic 
establishment can also be seen to be constructed by Guibert as permit-
ting his autofictional avatar to move unproblematically into a similarly 
advantageous Italian space.9 That is to say that ‘Hervé Guibert’ is pre-
                                                 
8 
As Derek Robbins explains in Bourdieu and Culture (2000), Bourdieu sees 
culture as something that must be continually enacted by individuals, and in 
which individuals seek ‘marks of distinction’ through which to establish their 
status. Bourdieu used the notion of ‘cultural capital’ in order to reinforce the 
view that culture is a currency that people use rather than an innate quality 
(Robbins 2000). 
9 
Other works written by Guibert that do not fall within the remit of my current 
study shed a considerably less favourable light on the space of Rome, notably 
L’Incognito.

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
149 
sented as spending considerable time at both the ‘Villa espagnole’ in 
Rome, a place specifically designated for talented French writers and 
artists, and at a friend’s home on the ‘Ile d’Elbe’. Indeed, the signifi-
cance of Italy for ‘Hervé Guibert’ as a space of belonging, albeit one 
that is of lesser importance than that of Paris, is clear: references both 
to Elba (ALA: 121; 147; Le PC: 137) and Rome (ALA: 175; 179; 180; 
Le PC: 25; 139; 140; HCR: 32) particularly dominate the first two of 
Guibert’s AIDS texts. These Italian spaces are presented as sites in 
which ‘Hervé Guibert’ unproblematically establishes a sense of be-
longing and homeliness. The city of Rome, for example, is frequently 
referred to as a place where the narrator lived for two years, and in 
which he acquired homely possessions and collected art objects (Le 
PC: 137-9). Perhaps most importantly, however, is the fact that ‘Hervé 
Guibert’’s sense of belonging here is presented as in part due to the 
positive impact of these spaces upon his artistic and writerly pursuits. 
Rome, for instance, is not only a place in which he again meets many 
similarly talented people, but is mentioned as early as the second page 
of A l’ami and is clearly associated with the conception of the book it-
self: ‘ce jour où j’entreprends ce livre, le 26 décembre 1988, à 
Rome…’ (ALA: 10). Similarly, Elba is highlighted by Guibert’s auto-
fictional narrator as a place of literary creativity as well as of belong-
ing and happiness. He describes it as ‘cet endroit miraculeux où je me 
sens si bien, où tout est beauté, où l’arrivée est plus heureuse que le 
soulagement de départ, et où j’ai écrit la plupart de mes livres’ (Le 
PC: 142). In both of these Italian spaces, Guibert’s autofictional narra-
tor is cast as surrounded by friends and as living in an artistically 
stimulating environment. 
An initial foray into the world that Guibert creates for his in-
tratextual construction of selfhood, then, indicates that the spaces of 
Paris, Rome and Elba are of considerable importance. In chapter 1, I 
established that home could be defined as a place in which an individ-
ual makes an emotional investment and in which a person could ide-
ally ‘be oneself, at ease, secure and at rest’ (Kennedy 1996: viii). In 
the case of ‘Hervé Guibert’, in addition to the importance of homely 
possessions and the presence of friends in spaces of home and belong-
ing, Guibert emphasises the essential nature of artistic and writerly 
stimulation. For ‘Hervé Guibert’, then, any notion of home must take 
into account his desire to site himself in a particular cultural location, 
one that is dependent upon literary and artistic cultural capital. It is to

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
150 
the impact of the HIV virus upon ‘Hervé Guibert’’s relationship with 
cultural space that my discussion will now turn. 
 
 
3.2 The Spaces of AIDS: Body and Space 
 
The presence of the HIV virus within Guibert’s narratives is presented 
as considerably altering the spaces within which Guibert’s intratextual 
avatar moves and lives. As several critics have remarked (Hughes 
1999: 105-136), evident across Guibert’s AIDS corpus are the medical 
spaces into which his autofictional double is drawn once his HIV posi-
tive status is suspected. ‘Hervé Guibert’ is cast as attending firstly 
l’hôpital Claude-Bernard (ALA: 51; 53; 55; 238) and later l’hôpital 
Rothschild (ALA: 238; 239; Le PC: 27; 46; 66), as well as la Pitié-
Salpetrière where Muzil dies (ALA: 104), and references to these lo-
cations litter the narratives.10 The act of visiting these new spaces is 
narratively presented as disrupting the normal rhythms that organise 
‘Hervé Guibert’’s experience of both time and space and he com-
plains, for example, of being required to travel long-distances to pe-
ripheral banlieues of Paris for early morning medical appointments. In 
A l’ami, in relation to his first appointment at l’hôpital Claude-Ber-
nard, ‘Hervé Guibert’ tells us: ‘j’ai dû me rendre à jeun et de bonne 
heure, ne dormant pratiquement pas de la nuit par peur de manquer ce 
rendez-vous’. Inconvenienced not only by the early hour of his ap-
pointment, he also has to ‘traverser de bout en bout Paris’ (ALA: 51). 
The peripheral location of this hospital is reinforced a little later in the 
text with the words ‘je traversai une seconde bretelle du périphérique 
pour parvenir au portail de l’hôpital Claude-Bernard’ (ALA: 56).11 At-
tending hospitals such as the Claude-Bernard, located in this case in 
the furthest reaches of the 18e, casts ‘Hervé Guibert’ out of the range 
                                                 
10 
The medical spaces into which ‘Hervé Guibert’ is drawn can be seen to con-
form with what Martel terms an ‘unité de lieu (la Pitié, Rothschild, Broussais, 
Claude-Bernard)’ common to many French AIDS writers. Clearly, then, Gui-
bert’s autofictionally constructed account of being drawn into new, peripheral 
Parisian spaces by the HIV virus is not atypical of other cultural representa-
tions of the illness. See Martel (1994: 167). 
11 
The hospital in which Guibert constructs his narrator as writing Cytoméga-
lovirus at the end of his life is similarly described as located on the périphéri-
que, the ring road delimiting the outskirts of the city of Paris.

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
151 
of his usual haunts in the Left Bank and out of the cultural heart of 
central Paris. 
We can infer from Guibert’s AIDS texts that these medical sites 
are not merely geographically peripheral, but are also culturally mar-
ginal. L’hôpital Claude-Bernard, for example, is described as ‘[un] 
hôpital mort’ (ALA: 55) and ‘un hôpital fantôme au bout du monde’ 
(ALA: 53), which is disused other than for AIDS patients. As ‘Hervé 
Guibert’ is textually presented as discovering, asking directions to 
such a stigma-laden place elicits a very particular response from ordi-
nary members of society (ALA: 56). Similarly, the culturally tainted 
connotations of l’Institut Alfred-Fournier, a former VD clinic, are 
evident in a particularly ironic passage in which we read: ‘Jules m’a 
fait remarquer qu’ils ont mis une moquette neuve à l’Institut Alfred-
Fournier, un peu déclinant depuis la syphilis, et soudain prospéré 
comme une usine de capotes’ (ALA : 182). The geographically pe-
ripheral and culturally marginal sites into which medical appointments 
direct ‘Hervé Guibert’ thrust him into new spaces within his home 
city, both reflecting and contributing to the detrimental impact of 
AIDS upon his formerly privileged cultural position. In fact, this ele-
ment of Guibert’s work is pertinent in terms of the light it sheds upon 
Bourdieu’s theory of culture that I discussed above. From Guibert’s 
AIDS texts we can infer that the advent of a catastrophic and deeply 
stigmatised illness such as AIDS significantly undermines the ability 
of an individual to determine their own place, both physical and sym-
bolic, in culture through ‘position-taking’. In this case, the impact of 
AIDS clearly affects ‘Hervé Guibert’’s cultural identity because it 
causes him to move out of the spaces in which he gains and exhibits 
his ‘cultural capital’ and casts him instead into sites that are both cul-
turally and physically marginal. 
In fact, ‘Hervé Guibert’ is not only presented as cast into new 
spaces by the progression of the HIV virus within his body, but his 
experience of familiar spaces is flagged as modified by the advent of 
AIDS. Driving through the Parisian banlieue in a taxi on the way back 
from some of his earliest medical tests, ‘Hervé Guibert’ reflects upon 
his and Jules’s condition and concludes: ‘je me dis que nous avions 
tous les deux le sida. Cela modifiait tout en un instant, tout basculait et 
le paysage avec autour de cette certitude’ (ALA: 41, my italics). In-
deed, it is driving back through ‘les rues désertes de Paris’ (ALA: 
194) after having dinner in the Marais quarter that ‘Hervé Guibert’ is

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
152 
presented as confessing to Bill that he is HIV positive. The places in 
which such definitive moments in the establishment of his status as a 
person with AIDS are narratively cast as taking place seem increas-
ingly to haunt Guibert’s autofictionally rendered self, colouring his 
perception of even very familiar landscapes. This is evident in the dis-
cussion of the anonymous HIV test which ‘Hervé Guibert’ tells us he 
had ‘non loin de la statue de Jeanne d’Arc qui s’élève sur le boulevard 
Saint-Marcel, à l’angle d’une petite rue, la rue du Jura’ (ALA: 153). 
He tells us: ‘devant laquelle [la statue], des mois après je ne pouvais 
plus passer, sur le trajet de l’autobus 91 que j’empruntais pour me 
rendre à mes dîners avec David, sans ressentir aussitôt un frisson into-
lérable’ (ALA: 152). Situated on Paris’s Left Bank, this space would 
previously have constituted a familiar space of social activity and 
positive cultural encounters for ‘Hervé Guibert’. Now it is indelibly 
marked by the threat and stigma presented by the HIV virus. 
The most striking modifications in Guibert’s narrator’s experi-
ence of space can, however, only be understood in relation to his own 
body. In fact, the body has been hailed by many critics as an essential 
focus of any Guibertian study, and as such has received considerable 
critical attention. Michael Worton, for example, has asserted that ‘le 
corps de Guibert est partout dans son oeuvre’ (Worton 1997: 63). 
Moreover, Ralph Sarkonak, in the introduction to his edited collection 
entitled Le Corps textuel de Hervé Guibert (1997) argues that for 
Guibert ‘[le corps n’est] pas simplement un thème mais le principe 
générateur de l’oeuvre’ (Sarkonak 1997b: 9). Whilst there has been, 
then, much fruitful analysis of Guibert’s autofictional constructions of 
the corporeal, I wish here to address the essential, spatially-situated 
nature of the Guibertian body, a phenomenon that has received con-
siderably less attention. 
In recent times a flourishing body of academic enquiry has 
grown up, stimulated particularly by the growing prominence of iden-
tity politics and feminist scholarship, around the notion that the body 
and space are interdependent. In fact, as I argued in chapter 1, the no-
tion that the body can no longer be simply dismissed as biologically 
given but rather is shaped by the spaces in which it moves, has be-
come increasingly prominent with the emergence of postmodern 
thought. Concomitantly, there has been a realisation that spaces have a 
constitutive role to play in the formation of bodies. The work of those 
such as Elizabeth Grosz, Nancy Duncan and Heidi J. Nast, then, all

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
153 
points to the conclusion that bodies and spaces are inextricably and 
mutually constitutively linked in the contemporary world.12 I will now 
develop this notion of the inter-connectedness of body and space, fo-
cusing both on the impact of space upon ‘Hervé Guibert’’s own per-
ception of his body as well as that cast upon him by society. 
Across the AIDS texts, the declining physical capacities of 
Guibert’s autofictional avatar are continually highlighted. I wish to 
contend here that ‘Hervé Guibert’’s bodily decline can be understood 
only in reference to the spaces in which it occurs. On the opening page 
of Le Protocole compassionnel, for example, ‘Hervé Guibert’ de-
scribes his increasingly desperate physical state, asserting that he is 
‘perdant chaque jour un geste que j’étais encore capable de produire la 
veille’ (Le PC: 12). That these incremental physical losses are meas-
ured in relation to the narrator’s home spaces is evident: 
 
Ma force motrice continue de décliner avec le jour: pour la sieste, je 
suis capable de fixer le rideau de la chambre à un crochet que m’a 
cloué Gustave par rapport à la distance que me permettait mon bras, 
mais je me suis rendu compte que le soir au coucher il ne pouvait plus 
l’atteindre. (Le PC: 160-161)  
 
For ‘Hervé Guibert’, then, it is the location of his body in a particular, 
familiar space that permits him to realise the extent of his deteriora-
tion. In this way, the everyday spaces of life serve as benchmarks 
against which to measure his former physical capabilities and the de-
gree to which he is deteriorating. In what is perhaps one of the most 
poignantly humorous passages in Guibert’s autofictional writing, in Le 
Protocole compassionnel we find an incident in which ‘Hervé 
Guibert’ falls over going into the ‘café de la rue Alésia’ where, we are 
told, ‘il m’arrive depuis dix ans de boire quelque chose’ (Le PC: 15). 
‘Hervé Guibert’ recounts the actions of a waiter whom he had ‘tou-
jours pris pour un ennemi’ but who, in the face of his inability to stand 
up, ‘s’approcha de moi et me prit dans ses bras pour me remettre sur 
pied, comme la chose la plus naturelle du monde’ (Le PC: 15). In this 
incident, then, we can detect clear evidence of the deeply interdepend-
ent nature of body and space in Guibert’s work: familiar spaces are 
presented as not merely reinforcing ‘Hervé Guibert’’s realisation of 
                                                 
12 
For a thorough discussion of the work of these theorists as well as the topic of 
the interdependency of body and space in general, see chapter 1.

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
154 
his physical deterioration and weakness, but it is evident that his dete-
riorating corporeal capacities also generate a new perspective on sites 
that he had previously believed to be thoroughly familiar. Moreover, 
in an especially pertinent passage of Le Protocole compassionnel in 
which Berthe’s mother makes a harsh comment about his declining 
health, Guibert’s autofictional double tells us: 
 
j’ai pris conscience ici, à cause des difficultés nouvelles de locomo-
tion et de manipulation adaptées à l’espace qui m’était entièrement 
familier […], à cause aussi du regard de ceux qui ne m’avait pas vu 
depuis un an, que je suis vraiment très malade. (Le PC: 141) 
 
It is, then, through the presence of others, and more precisely through 
the evaluative regard of the other as it plays itself out in familiar 
spaces, that the narrator judges his own physical state. In fact, I wish 
to contend that visibility and the ‘gaze’ is inextricably tied up in the 
physical well-being/spatial mobility relationship within Guibert’s 
work, as will become evident a little later in my discussion. 
A further example of the mutually reflexive, inter-dependent 
nature of body and space is also to be found in the way that HIV alters 
‘Hervé Guibert’’s capacity wilfully to move his body between and oc-
cupy different spaces. From the micro to the macro scale, the degree 
of mobility of Guibert’s autofictionally rendered self, as well as his 
ability to choose between different methods of transport, are altered 
by the advent of AIDS. In Le Protocole compassionnel, ‘Hervé 
Guibert’’s means of journeying around Paris is directly related to his 
physical state. After initially highlighting the difficulties involved in 
travelling by bus: ‘ça devenaient une hantise de monter la marche en 
m’agrippant à la barre puis de me relever du siège pour descendre à la 
station…’ (Le PC: 11), he becomes increasingly dependent upon taxis 
(Le PC: 42). Having obtained a supply of ‘DDI’ and enjoying a sub-
sequent physical improvement, he tells us that he begins to take the 
bus again: ‘je reprends l’autobus, je m’agrippe aux deux barres pour 
monter la marche, et je fais attention de ne pas perdre l’équilibre en 
lâchant la main qui met le ticket dans la poinçeuse’ (Le PC: 97). This 
new physical strength and the consequent possibility of travelling by 
bus is not as trivial as we might assume. On the contrary, for ‘Hervé 
Guibert’ we can ascertain that it casts him into a different relationship 
with the spaces of the city. Far from resembling the isolated cocoon of 
a taxi moving directly from starting point to destination, the bus is de-

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
155 
picted by Guibert as the means to a broader journeying experience, 
filled with unknown and stimulating encounters, perhaps a modern 
equivalent of flânerie.13 
In fact, in his textual representation of bus journeys, Guibert 
seems implicitly to foreground the importance of the visual within the 
body/space relationship. Within the bus itself, for example, ‘Hervé 
Guibert’ interacts with unknown people, turning upon them the gaze 
of which he is often the object. He tells us: ‘dans l’autobus, derrière 
des lunettes noires, je regarde les jeunes femmes. Je les trouves jolies, 
presque appétissantes’ (Le PC: 97). Moreover, serving as a mobile 
vantage point, the glass windows of the bus seem to invite a speculat-
ing regard on the outside world. In this way, travelling by bus seems 
to furnish Guibert’s autofictionally rendered self with unexpected tales 
and incidents to recount. We are told, for example, that ‘samedi vers 
16 heures, à l’arrêt du 58 à Montparnasse, j’ai vu un homme mourir 
d’une crise cardiaque sous mes yeux’ (Le PC: 112). Initially uncertain 
of what to do, ‘Hervé Guibert’ is cast as telling the bus driver to call 
an ambulance, thus allowing him, he recalls, to play at ‘mes ambulan-
ciers’ (Le PC: 114). It is pertinent to draw, here, upon Marcy E. 
Schwartz’s study of Latin American literary constructions of Paris, in 
which she overtly addresses the importance of windows in the city. 
She tells us that in the work of Julio Cortázar, ‘the ambiguity of glass, 
transparent yet enclosing, delicate yet restraining, contributes to [… 
the] construction of Paris as liminal and interstitial: as a passageway 
between alternative modes of behaviour, different but coinciding his-
torical times and moments of metamorphosis’ (Schwartz 1999: 35). 
Certainly, for ‘Hervé Guibert’, being enclosed within the ‘dangerous 
[glass] boundaries’ (Schwartz 1999: 35) of the bus represents some-
thing much more significant than merely a cheap way to travel. In 
fact, in the passage cited above, ‘Hervé Guibert’’s observation of the 
world through the windows of the bus prompts him to try to help an ill 
stranger. In this way, he undertakes an active role, permitting him to 
resist his usual position as the abnormal object of society’s gaze and 
his normal role of passive victim. Just as for Cortázar, then, for ‘Hervé 
                                                 
13 
The figure of the flâneur is often associated with Modernist literary represen-
tations of the city, and refers to a privileged figure who wandered around the 
city observing urban life. Perhaps most famous is the work of Walter Benja-
min on Charles Baudelaire’s textual constructions of flânerie. For a discussion 
of this see Tester (1994).

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
156 
Guibert’ the windows of the bus represent ‘a passageway between al-
ternative modes of behaviour’. Moreover, the mobile nature of this 
‘passageway’, travelling as it does around the city, allows him to par-
ticipate more fully in his urban environment. Overall, we can infer 
that the interdependency of space and body, interlinked with visibility, 
are not only crucial aspects of ‘Hervé Guibert’’s ability to undertake 
different activities, but are also of paramount importance to his own 
sense of identity and his role in the world. 
In L’Homme au chapeau rouge, travelling by bus seems inex-
tricably interlinked with the Guibertian narrator’s key occupation: that 
of collecting paintings. He tells us that instead of going directly to the 
usual ‘salles de ventes de banlieue […] moi je prends l’autobus’ 
(HCR: 34). It is his ability to look out of the window as the bus 
weaves a winding path through the fabric of the urban landscape that 
allows the intratextual Guibert to discover new art shops rather than 
merely visiting those that he already knows, thus forging new rela-
tionships with his home city. He adds: ‘je me souviens de chaque au-
tobus qui m’a permis de découvrir un tableau’ and even goes so far as 
to name particular bus routes: ‘la boutique du boulevard Raspail qui 
aujourd’hui n’existe plus, je l’ai repéré depuis l’autobus 68’ (HCR: 
34). I will return later in my discussion to the argument that the collec-
tion of tableaux, permanent works of art, is undertaken by the ailing 
autofictionally rendered Guibert in order to resist his increasingly all-
engulfing status as a person with AIDS and to wrestle for himself a 
non-AIDS defined, non-ephemeral dimension to his identity. For the 
moment, however, it is clear that the narrator’s ability to travel by bus, 
in turn dependent on his physical well being, considerably affects his 
knowledge of the space of Paris and the activities that he is able to un-
dertake. 
Affecting his movements in domestic spaces as well as his mo-
bility and activities in city space, ‘Hervé Guibert’’s diseased body is 
also flagged as impacting upon his ability to negotiate international 
space. Indeed, ‘Hervé Guibert’ is presented as so aware of the poten-
tial threats to his mobility that the incursion of AIDS into his body 
represents, that he insists upon taking an anonymous HIV test. We are 
told in A l’ami: ‘je dis au docteur Chandi qu’en raison de mes incess-
santes allées et venues entre l’Italie et la France je devais avant tout 
préserver ma liberté à passer cette frontière’ (ALA: 153). Despite this 
precaution, however, impediments to the autofictionally rendered

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
157 
Guibert’s international movements do become evident. When he is 
stopped at customs on his trip to Moscow in L’Homme au chapeau 
rouge, for example, we are told that ‘ils ont immédiatement saisi les 
douze sachets du médicament qui me tient provisoirement en vie’ 
(HCR: 140). Later on, when confronted with a similar situation upon 
arrival in Ouagadougou, ‘Hervé Guibert’ avoids having his move-
ments restricted by fallaciously explaining away his ‘tonne de 
médicaments’ by claiming to have the more socially acceptable illness 
of leukaemia (HCR: 164). As Leslie Hill argues, illness represents 
‘l’impossibilité de confier à son propre corps le soin exclusif de sa 
survie’ (Hill 1995: 92). In the case of ‘Hervé Guibert’, it is not merely 
the fact of being ill, but the stigmatised nature of the illness itself that 
is significant. Indeed, his bodily disorder is marked by the necessity of 
carrying substantial quantities of medicines across national borders, 
generating suspicion and the potential for his entry into foreign coun-
tries to be refused. The disruption of the body of Guibert’s autofic-
tionally rendered self as monadic and self-sufficient presents a serious 
threat to his ability to move outside of French space and to transgress 
national borders. This not only demonstrates the interdependency of 
body and space on an international scale, then, but reinforces the ar-
gument by Sabatier that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter 
that a classic response to ‘plague and pestilence’ has been to restrict 
the movements of strangers (Sabatier 1988: 103). 
Perhaps the most convincing indicator of the crucial textual in-
terdependency of body and space in Guibert’s autofictions can be de-
tected in his pervasive usage of the device of pathetic fallacy. In this, 
the state of Guibert’s autofictionally rendered body seems to be mir-
rored by the landscapes through which he moves. When depicting his 
autofictionally rendered self’s physical struggle across Paris to attend 
early morning medical appointments, for example, Guibert allows the 
space of Paris to become equally dysfunctional and out of control. Be-
fore his first visit to the hôpital Claude-Bernard, Guibert’s narrator 
has to ‘traverser de bout en bout Paris paralysé par la grève semi-
générale’ (ALA: 51, my italics). Commenting on the lack of availabil-
ity of a taxi which might take him easily across the city, Guibert’s nar-
rator tells us: ‘j’avais dû m’écrabouiller dans la masse puante et 
résignée qui bondait un compartiment de métro déréglée par la grève’ 
(ALA: 52). Similarly, it is when ‘Hervé Guibert’’s test results have 
begun to decline, with serious implications for his future ability to

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
158 
take life-prolonging drugs, that he has to travel across Paris himself to 
l’Institut Alfred Fournier ‘à cause de la grève générale qui paralysait 
le courier’ (ALA: 210). Jean-Pierre Boulé’s assertion that ‘generally 
speaking, space [in Guibert’s writing] is defined by the progression of 
the virus’ (Boulé 1995a: 45) seems, then, to be something of an under-
statement. Redefining and mutually modifying each other, Guibert’s 
narrator’s body and the spaces in which it moves are textually con-
structed as highly interdependent from the micro- to macro-scale. It is 
in the context of this essential situatedness of the body in space that I 
will now turn to examine the spatial leitmotifs pervading Guibert’s 
autofictional writings. I will argue that the pervasive themes of Gui-
bertian space as it is represented in his AIDS texts consist of confine-
ment, resistance and escape. 
 
 
3.3 Spatial Leitmotifs 
Confinement: the Medical, the Concentration Camp  
and the Cellar 
 
Perhaps one of the most striking spatial leitmotifs within Guibert’s 
writing is his recurring preoccupation with imprisonment and con-
finement. Brad Epps, in a footnote to his essay ‘Le Corps «techno-
ascétique»; Guibert, le sida, et l’art de la maîtrise de soi’, notes that 
‘chez Guibert l’espace lui-même est souvent contraint et contraignant’ 
(Epps 1997: 61). As I have argued above, ‘Hervé Guibert’’s move-
ments are often restricted by the medical appointments that compel 
him to make inconvenient and difficult journeys through space in or-
der to present his ailing body within geographically peripheral medi-
cal spaces. Moreover, the environments of such medical encounters 
are themselves presented as physically confining and restrictive. 
Whilst few critics have commented upon space within Guibert’s writ-
ing, the confinement that his narrator endures within medical spaces 
has provoked some stimulating academic scholarship. 
Imbued as they are with power relations, the medical spaces in 
which the intratextual Guibert moves can be seen to constrain the nar-
rator’s body, and indeed his identity, in particular ways. The Fou-
cauldian reading of these spaces undertaken by Alex Hughes in Het-
erographies is particularly helpful in understanding this phenomenon. 
This work draws upon Foucault’s argument in Surveiller et punir

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
159 
(1975) that in order to achieve their aim of producing ‘docile bodies’, 
which may at best be harnessed to play a productive role in society 
and at worst controlled in order to be of minimal hindrance to society, 
institutions undertake strategies to contain bodies within segregated 
and cellularised, visually surveillable spaces (Foucault 1977). Apply-
ing this Foucauldian logic to Guibert’s autofictional writing, Hughes 
argues that the spaces into which Guibert’s narrator moves particu-
larly once he is diagnosed as HIV positive 
 
are revealed as partitioned, partitioning loci. They are cast as seg-
mented spaces where the AIDS victim enters so many cellules, 
cabines, specially dedicated pavillons barricadés and boxes de ponc-
tions du sang that isolate him from the community of the well whilst 
keeping him in proximity to it, expose him to codifying operations of 
knowledge/research, and or regulate and contain the contagion – and 
the medical challenge – intrinsic to his condition. (Hughes 1999: 110) 
 
These cells, which represent the rational, masculine logic of contain-
ing and controlling disease, are defined by their geometry and clean 
lines. Constituting the clear antithesis of curving, sinuous, female 
forms of enclosure, these boxes seem to allow no possibility for the 
existence of plurality, but effectively control the bodies placed within 
them. 
In addition to the power-imbued control mechanisms that riddle 
medical space and are referred to by Muzil in A l’ami, many of Gui-
bert’s AIDS texts emphasize the ways in which seemingly random en-
counters with incompetent staff and poor equipment increase con-
finement. In Cytomégalovirus, the journal d’hospitalisation which re-
counts a stay in hospital endured by Guibert towards the end of his 
life, and which is a more simply referential text than those previously 
discussed, the matter of spatial confinement is most vividly presented. 
In this work, Guibert’s intratextual self is confined to residing within a 
medical institution and to obeying its mores for two weeks. His re-
striction within this medical environment extends unnecessarily to 
control his most mundane and trivial movements by the lack of provi-
sion of a movable IV transfusion stand. Becoming increasingly frus-
trated with his immobile, broken stand, we are told that ‘cela réduit 
énormément mes possibilités de mouvements dans la chambre’ (C: 
13) and he tells us that he plans his movements so as to accomplish as 
much as possible in each space and thereby avoid having to return. Al-

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
160 
ready restricted by his deteriorating physical state to limited mobility, 
the movement in space of Guibert’s textually represented body is fur-
ther inhibited by the sub-standard nature of the medical environment 
in which he finds himself. 
Moreover, within Guibert’s autofictional writing, the confine-
ment visited upon his autofictionally represented body by the medical 
establishment is shown to restrict his movements on a much wider 
scale. In L’Homme au chapeau rouge, for example, ‘Hervé Guibert’ 
tells us: ‘j’avais de la fièvre, je toussais, le docteur Nacier insistait 
pour que je renonce à ce voyage à Madrid avec le peintre Yannis’ 
(HCR: 15). The power of the medical establishment is such, then, that 
once it assumes responsibility for his case, ‘Hervé Guibert’’s move-
ments are restricted in all aspects of his life and he becomes effec-
tively imprisoned in Paris. Particularly helpful in any investigation of 
just how the medical establishment succeeds in extending its grip in 
this way is a passage in Le Protocole compassionnel. In this, ‘Hervé 
Guibert’ recounts the refusal of his doctor, Claudette Dumouchel, to 
allow him to go away to Italy, telling us: 
 
Je dis à Claudette: «Je veux partir» et Claudette me répond: «Je ne 
vous laisserai pas partir.» Je n’ai rien d’autre à faire à Paris que voir 
Claudette, dont je suis le prisonnier qui l’aime finalement. Je sentirais 
terriblement décue si elle me donnait le feu vert, je me sentirais aban-
donné par elle. (Le PC: 58) 
 
Evidently, the insidious nature of control exerted by the medical es-
tablishment engenders a feeling of emotional as well as physical de-
pendency, which is expressed by ‘Hervé Guibert’ as a fear of moving 
his body out of reach of the sites of medical control. Clear compliance 
can be seen here with a model of medical power relations that Deb-
orah Lupton advances in Medicine as Culture: Illness, Disease and 
the Body in Western Society (1994). In this she argues that, at least in 
Foucauldian terms, power in the medical context 
 
is not a unitary entity, but a strategic relation which is diffuse and in-
visible. Power is not necessarily a subjugating force aimed at domina-
tion which itself is vulnerable to resistance, but rather is closer to the 
idea of a form of social organization by which social order and con-
formity are maintained by voluntary means. (Lupton 1994: 111)

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
161 
In the case of ‘Hervé Guibert’, then, his spatial restriction is not the 
result of any threat of punishment or retribution if he fails to comply 
with the medical advice he is given, or even any physical barriers put 
in the way of his movement. In fact, it is the result of his adoption of 
the accepted Western model of what Lupton terms the ‘passive pa-
tient’ who is socialized to accept the constant regulation of his body 
by medical testing and supervision. The insidious nature of medical 
power relations, then, engenders an emotional dependency in ‘Hervé 
Guibert’ that is presented as constraining him to remain in close spa-
tial proximity to his doctors. Indeed, an examination of the textual 
representation of Guibert to be found in Cytomégalovirus indicates 
that this growing dependency takes a similarly spatial form to that ex-
pressed in Le Protocole compassionnel above. In Cytomégalovirus, 
the intratextual Guibert tells us that his hospital room has become ‘un 
cocon insidieux qui, petit à petit, rend effrayant l’espace réel de 
l’extérieur, même le couloir’ (C: 47). In sum, throughout Guibert’s 
AIDS texts, the medical establishment is associated with spatial con-
finement and restriction. The pervasive yet subtle reach of medical 
control is shown to confine Guibert’s textually constructed selves not 
only within medical environments, but also even in terms of their in-
ternational movements, a factor that seems to engender increasing 
emotional dependency. 
In an essay entitled ‘The Language of War in AIDS Discourse’, 
Michael S. Sherry adds an interesting dimension to the discussion of 
people with AIDS and feelings of confinement. Sherry argues that the 
fear of confinement experienced by many people with AIDS at the 
time of Guibert’s writing can be attributed to their very real belief in 
the possibility that they might be indefinitely quarantined in concen-
tration camp-style detention centres (Sherry 1993: 41). Such a fear is 
clearly evident in Guibert’s narrator’s ironic comment: ‘heureusement 
vraiment que le sida est une maladie acrobatiquement transmissible, 
sinon je vous écrirais depuis ma cellule, derrière des barreaux’ (Le 
PC: 79). This pervasive fear, Sherry argues, was countered by the use 
of holocaust metaphors by gay men, wishing to highlight the sinister 
potential of the AIDS crisis. It is certainly true that Guibert overtly 
employs Holocaust imagery in his AIDS texts. His autofictionally 
rendered self is labelled ‘bébé-Auschwitz’ by Jules (Le PC: 128) and 
‘Hervé Guibert’ himself describes the sight of his wasted body in the 
bathroom mirror each morning as taking place ‘en panoramique

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
162 
auschwitzien’ (Le PC: 18). Moreover, reflecting upon the future of his 
skeletal self, ‘Hervé Guibert’ directly compares his own experience 
with that of Holocaust survivors, telling us that ‘parfois j’ai l’impres-
sion qu’il va s’en sortir puisque des gens sont bien revenues 
d’Auschwitz, d’autres fois il est clair qu’il est condamné, en route vers 
la tombe, inéluctablement’ (Le PC: 19). It is of paramount importance 
to note that this Nazism-inflected imagery, which is argued by Sherry 
to be a reaction to the fear of confinement of people with AIDS, is 
targeted by Guibert specifically at the contemporary French medical 
establishment rather than at society in general. In A l’ami, the narrator 
describes the hôpital Claude Bernard as ‘un hôpital fantôme au bout 
du monde, me souvenant de ma visite de Dachau’ (ALA: 53). Later, 
he presents the doctor who carried out his first, traumatic ‘fibroscopie’ 
as having ‘[un] physique de sadique de film de nazis’ (Le PC: 69). 
Moreover, employed to depict both medical space and personnel, 
holocaust imagery is also adopted by the narrator in relation to the 
very medical treatments that are allegedly therapeutic in effect. The 
intratextual Guibert witnesses ‘une scène […] qui m’avait paru par-
ticulièrement atroce’ in which the torturous nature of the medical 
treatment meted out to a fellow patient leads him to suspect that ‘il n’y 
avait plus dans ce corps squelettique qu’un hurlement ininterrompu’ 
(Le PC: 49). Sharing the fears of many of his contemporaries that 
people with AIDS might be confined on grounds of quarantine, Gui-
bert’s autofictional double unmistakeably points an accusatory finger 
at the medical establishment, implying that this is the locus both of se-
rious confinement and of inhumane treatment. 
Evidently, Guibert’s autofictional narrator is constructed as un-
dergoing considerable confinement within the medical environment. 
Disciplining his body, relinquishing his autonomy to the ordered, in-
stitutional spaces of hospitals that emblematise the promises of pro-
gressive French rationalism and logic, this confinement does occa-
sionally seem to be welcomed by the narrator. The overwhelming tone 
invoked by his accounts of confinement is, however, that of fear, to 
the extent that there is a direct association between the medical estab-
lishment and the Holocaust. This fear of confinement extends into the 
narrator’s extramedical life, and it is to the investigation of this that 
my discussion will now turn. 
Outside his accounts of life in the medical arena, further refer-
ences to imprisonment and confinement are apparent in Guibert’s

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
163 
AIDS texts. Perhaps most noticeably and most widely cited by critics 
is the incident in which the autofictional Guibert becomes locked in 
his own cellar. Highlighting the significance of this incident, critic 
Emily Apter has argued that Guibert’s narrator’s imprisonment in his 
cave ‘emblematizes the person-with-sida’s encounter with abjection, 
humiliation, and outrage on learning that he is to be cheated out of his 
life portion’ (Apter 1993: 94). Most pertinent to my discussion here, 
however, is the narrator’s implication that, at least on one level, his 
imprisonment in this cellar is not an accident. He tells us that not only 
is ‘Hervé Guibert’’s cellar door the only unmarked, unrecognisable 
one, but that ‘la porte, sans aucun courant d’air, comme si une main 
invisible l’avait poussé dans mon dos, se referme sur moi’ (Le PC: 
80). In his introduction to this tale, the narrator tells us: ‘le lendemain 
de la première fibroscopie je me laissai enfermer dans ma cave’ (Le 
PC: 78). The cave incident, in which the autofictional Guibert consid-
ers his total impotence in the face of imminent death, is clearly linked 
by this first sentence with a torturous medical intervention that was 
experienced by the narrator as a horrific assault, tantamount to a rape, 
which makes him consider suicide. The association between death in a 
dungeon-like cellar and the concentration-camp-style death that he 
fears will be inflicted on him by the medical establishment is evi-
dent.14 
Indeed, the pervasive nature of the control exerted upon the 
autofictional Guibert in the medical environment that seeps insidi-
ously into the rest of his life leads him to develop what could be 
termed a siege mentality and a fear of invasion. Early in Guibert’s 
AIDS corpus, Muzil is described as battling against ‘la progression 
diabolique du champignon qui colonisait ses poumons’ (ALA: 98). 
Moreover, discussing the progression of the virus within his own 
body, Guibert’s narrator tells us ‘il me semble connaître la cartogram-
phie de ses colonisations’ (ALA: 48). As Owen Heathcote argues, ‘in 
Guibert’s AIDS novels the self is invaded by an alien other which 
changes and becomes a new self’ (Heathcote 1995: 427). This bodily 
invasion by the HIV virus is closely linked to the associated invasion 
                                                 
14 
The motif of the cellar as site of unofficial and ‘illegal’ death recurs in 
L’Homme au chapeau rouge, the narrator suspecting that Lena’s disappeared 
brother has actually been murdered and his body stored in the shop cellar 
(HCR: 162). The very same cellar is simultaneously said to be full of ‘trésors’, 
in the form of paintings, and the association with Nazism is again intriguing.

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
164 
of the most intimate spaces of the narrator’s life, as his literary suc-
cess, and the consequent change in his financial fortunes, makes him 
fear that his home will be invaded. He tells us in L’Homme au cha-
peau rouge that ‘depuis quelques semaines des inconnus sonnaient à 
l’interphone ou à l’une de mes deux portes’ (HCR: 17) and compares 
this home to ‘un coffre-fort tapissé de tableaux. On n’est pas dans les 
favelas de Rio mais dehors la lutte pour la vie continue’ (HCR: 18). 
‘Hervé Guibert’’s fear of confinement, extending so far as to leave 
him feeling under siege and threatened by invasion and colonisation, 
demonstrates yet another level on which the narrator’s body and home 
space mirror each other. 
The theme of spatial confinement is certainly highly pervasive 
within Guibert’s AIDS texts, then. Across his oeuvre, the medical es-
tablishment is presented as a major force of confinement, the scope of 
which extends far beyond medical spaces themselves. As the HIV vi-
rus’s grip tightens, Guibert presents a nuanced picture of the person 
with AIDS’ reaction to confinement, which is seen simultaneously as 
a welcome opportunity to defer responsibility onto a more powerful 
institution and a threat so potent that it can be compared to holocaust 
concentration camps. Despite the fact that Guibert’s autofictionally 
rendered self seems increasingly spatially confined in these texts, it is 
important to note that space is also presented as something that can be 
used as a tool for resistance, and it is to this that my discussion will 
now turn. 
 
 
Resistance 
 
It has been argued elsewhere that Foucauldian techniques of control-
ling and disciplining bodies by establishing norms of behaviour within 
visually surveillable, cellularised spaces can be seen to be at work in 
the medical spaces occupied by the autofictionally rendered Guibert. 
The existence of such norms of behaviour, however, inevitably invites 
the possibility of transgression and resistance, the textual dimensions 
of which are extensively discussed by Alex Hughes in Heterogra-
phies. In this, Hughes argues that for Guibert the author, avoiding 
writing a text that is simply referential and opting instead for the more 
complex generic form of autofiction ‘preserves its creator against a 
practice of readerly power that is precisely that to which his autofic-

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
165 
tional counterpart “Hervé Guibert” is exposed in all the medical 
spaces […] mapped in A l’ami’ (Hughes 1999: 114-115). For Guibert, 
then, many of his texts are formulated in such a way as to place him 
out of reach of the type of judgements and controls that he casts his 
autofictionally rendered self as undergoing. I wish to argue here that 
for Guibert’s intratextual persona, space itself is shown to be em-
ployed as a tool to resist disciplinary control. 
Whilst it is certainly true that as his illness progresses the auto-
fictionally rendered Guibert is drawn into increasingly institutional 
spaces (Hughes 1999: 107), I wish to contend that his growing knowl-
edge of the medical system is presented as affording him a greater ca-
pacity to resist and limit this control. Learning the traumatic nature of 
some medical interventions, as well as the disruption to his precious 
time and energy that frequent medical appointments cause, ‘Hervé 
Guibert’ is posited as specifically insisting that his medical appoint-
ments be kept to the absolute minimum. He refuses outright to un-
dergo some treatments, thus limiting the time that he spends in medi-
cal spaces. Moreover, he becomes less dependent upon learning his 
test results, thereby limiting his need to keep contacting the medical 
establishment from wherever he might be. He tells us: 
 
quand j’ai dû faire mes analyses à l’hôpital Spallanzani à Rome, […] 
je téléphonais au médecin ou à son assistante pour connaître le résul-
tat, le téléphoner à Paris et le commenter, dans une urgence qui 
m’apparaît maintenant complètement inutile. (Le PC: 190) 
 
No longer unquestioningly assuming the expected role of a passive pa-
tient who allows himself to be continually tested and regulated, then, 
‘Hervé Guibert’ disrupts the normal patient-doctor relationship. In 
placing himself outside the reach of the medical establishment both 
spatially and mentally, ‘Hervé Guibert’ succeeds in rendering ‘le 
médecin […] impuissant’ (Le PC: 189). 
Moreover, as he becomes increasingly familiar with the medical 
system, ‘Hervé Guibert’ is posited as undertaking meetings increas-
ingly frequently with doctors in neutral, non-medical spaces. It is per-
tinent to note that in L’Homme au Chapeau rouge, ‘Hervé Guibert’’s 
friend Yannis insists on undertaking business meetings, even those 
with such institutionalised people as his bank manager and interna-
tional art fraud police, in a public swimming pool, thus unsettling es-

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
166 
tablished power relations and gaining more advantageous deals (HCR: 
123). A similar strategy seems to be employed by the autofictionally 
rendered Guibert, consciously or unconsciously, as he increasingly 
draws doctors out of the power-ridden, institutional spaces of medi-
cine. In Le Protocole compassionnel, for example, the narrator meets 
Dr Chandi in social environments such as bars and restaurants: 
 
Le jeudi 31 mai, le docteur Chandi me proposa de prendre mon petit-
déjeuner avec lui au Sélect […]. Je l’avais inquiété au téléphone, il 
voulait que nous parlions ensemble en dehors de son cabinet. Au 
cours de cette entrevue il me réclama deux choses que je refusai toutes 
deux: 1) de prendre des antidépresseurs; 2) de faire un scanner céré-
bral. Il éclata de rire, il n’y avait rien d’autre à faire, quand je lui an-
nonçai mon refus de l’une ou de l’autre de ces choses. (Le PC: 27, my 
italics) 
 
In this case, the doctor-patient encounter is not merely displaced from 
institutional, power-ridden medical space, but it occurs instead in the 
Sélect, one of the very places that I argued in section 3.1 to both re-
flect and increase ‘Hervé Guibert’’s privileged cultural status as a 
writer and journalist. The effect of taking the doctor out of a space that 
reinforces his power is to change his behaviour: he is able to admit 
that he is worried, an emotion normally concealed from the patient, 
and can do nothing but laugh when the patient refuses his advice. In a 
similar incident in L’Homme au chapeau rouge, after a throat opera-
tion ‘Hervé Guibert’ draws another doctor out of medical space into a 
place that seems wholly inappropriate for someone who has just un-
dergone such a treatment. He tells us: ‘en sortant de la salle de repos, 
après l’opération, j’insistai auprès du docteur Nacier pour qu’il m’em-
mène sur-le-champ à la Coupole manger des huîtres’. When his advice 
that ‘Hervé Guibert’ should go home is refused, Nacier attempts to 
bring his patient to order as he enters the restaurant with the words 
 
«je ne sais pas si tu te rends compte, […] tu n’as pas dû te voir dans 
une glace, je dois tout de même te prévenir que tu fais une drôle 
d’impression avec ce gros pansement blanc sur le cou, et ta joue est 
encore toute jaune de l’antiseptique […].» Ce fut un jeune garçon que 
je n’avais encore jamais vu qui par hasard nous servit. Il m’observait à 
la dérobée avec des yeux innocents, ébahis et effrayés. Moi aussi je le 
regardai à la dérobée, j’avais envie de lui lécher le cul. (HCR: 43)

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
167 
In the episode recalled here, it is clear that ‘Hervé Guibert’ again 
draws his doctor into a non-medical space in order to even out the 
power relations between them, and to exert more control over his own 
life. Perhaps more importantly, however, in contravening normal so-
cial codes through introducing his sick body into a non-socially sanc-
tioned place, ‘Hervé Guibert’ reappropriates control over the defini-
tion of his sick body in society. That is to say that he resists his in-
creasing confinement in medical space and inserts himself again into 
spaces connoted with literary and artistic values in which he feels he 
belongs. ‘Hervé Guibert’ is presented, then, as increasingly able to re-
sist the control of the medical establishment by undermining its at-
tempt to confine his sick body within certain spaces. In addition, he is 
cast as rewriting the ‘non-medical’ spaces of Paris by constituting a 
monstrous visual presence within them and forcing AIDS onto the 
everyday landscape. 
Indeed, when obliged to enter medical space, ‘Hervé Guibert’ 
learns to resist through the same technique of performing his body in 
an unexpected manner and in this way undermining entrenched body-
space norms.15 This technique, which I have identified as becoming 
increasingly prevalent in Guibert’s autofictional texts, is also identi-
fied by David Caron within Cytomégalovirus. Caron argues that in 
this work, Guibert’s intratextual self resists the enforced passivity of 
the patient under the dehumanising medical gaze by refusing to con-
form to ‘normal’ behaviour and instead turning his body into a specta-
cle. Guibert’s textual double is recounted, for example, as refusing the 
humiliation of wearing a transparent blue operating gown when un-
dergoing surgery, insisting on walking to the operating theatre in his 
normal clothes before donning the green gown of the medical staff. As 
Caron argues, the Butlerian logic of this form of resistance is clear: in 
subverting expected dress codes, the power-relations of the doctor-
patient relationship, are also disrupted. Caron concludes: ‘if Guibert 
cannot avoid the operation, if he has no other choice than to enter in a 
relationship with a doctor, he can at least change the game and impose 
the rules of his own survival’ (Caron 1995: 239). In this case, the in-
tratextual Guibert refuses to perform his body in the manner expected 
                                                 
15 
As I argued in section 1.0.2 of this monograph, postmodern thought has fore-
grounded the notion that rather than fixed and essential, identities are physi-
cally performed.

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
168 
in a particular medical space and so unsettles the entrenched power-
relations and the unproblematic segregation of doctor and patient. 
In fact, Caron’s argument seems indirectly to interpellate one of 
the most crucial aspects of Foucault’s theory of spatial power relations 
in Discipline and Punish: that of the importance of visibility. That is 
to say that, according to Foucault, power relations within society rely 
not just on the techniques of spatial distribution that I have already al-
luded to, but on the enforcement of these distributions through visual 
observation. Perhaps most famously, Foucault drew upon Bentham’s 
panopticon, a model of a prison in which the inmates are housed in a 
circular form around an observation tower. This form of spatial or-
ganization, in which all prisoners are constantly visible but are unable 
to see whether or not they are being watched, reduces the need for ac-
tual surveillance and instead encourages the prisoners to police them-
selves according to Foucault. Within society, Foucault stresses that 
power relations may often function in similar ways: rather than cen-
tring round an observation tower, self-regulation is fostered by the es-
tablishment of norms of behaviour in particular spaces and situations, 
again leading individuals to self-regulate. Perhaps the most striking 
example of the role of visibility in Guibert’s work is that narrated in 
Le Protocole compassionnel in which ‘Hervé Guibert’ succeeds in 
videoing many of his medical encounters (see Le PC: 78 and 115-
121). Rather than leading him to self-regulate, however, ‘Hervé 
Guibert’’s harnessing of the visual allows him to resist the disempow-
ered position of patient that he would normally occupy. As Caron ar-
gues: 
 
The presence of the camera affects the relationship in a fundamental 
way. When he films, Guibert is theoretically on both sides of the cam-
era, as he and the doctor appear simultaneously on screen. The situa-
tion has two immediate consequences: first, the patient’s position both 
behind and in front of the camera prevents him from simply occupy-
ing the authoritarian subject position previously occupied by the doc-
tor; second, the doctor’s presence on the screen alongside her patient 
levels their relationship. The doctor too has a body. (Caron 1995: 246) 
 
The repositioning of ‘Hervé Guibert’ as observer as well as observed 
is not merely represented as affording him a greater sense of equality, 
but on the occasion of his throat operation, it has concrete results. Al-
ready alerted to the possibility that the operation might have been un-

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
169 
successful, it is through taking the video home and watching it that 
‘Hervé Guibert’ establishes the truth of this failed operation (HCR: 
44). His use of the video, then, not only disrupts the normally irre-
sistible power relations that objectivize the patient’s body in medical 
space, but also allows the narrator to evaluate the medical encounter 
from the empowered site of his own home, thus regaining agency over 
his own life. 
In his excellent essay, ‘A Walk Along the Side of the Motor-
way: AIDS and the Spectacular Body of Hervé Guibert’ (1998: 151-
172), Murray Pratt develops a convincing argument on similar lines to 
that elaborated here in relation to Cytomégalovirus. Again revealing 
the inextricable interdependency of body, space and the power-ridden 
regard, Pratt highlights the potential of all three to generate loci of re-
sistance. Pratt focuses on an incident that we are told occurred during 
Guibert’s textual self’s two-week stay in hospital, in which he is ap-
parently offered a day-pass to leave the hospital in order to enjoy the 
unseasonably good weather. Due to the peripheral location of the hos-
pital, the only option would be to take a walk along the side of the Pa-
risian périphérique. Should the intratextual Guibert choose to under-
take such an unusual activity, Pratt argues, he ‘would undoubtedly be-
come a spectacular centre of attention’ (1998: 155). Rather like when 
refusing to behave and dress in the manner expected of someone about 
to undergo surgery as I argued above, Pratt suggests that in doing this, 
the intratextual Guibert would generate an ‘optic of astonishment’ that 
would challenge preconceptions. The spectacular image of the intra-
textual Guibert walking alongside the motorway, then, would present 
a ‘strategic challenge to the visibilization of AIDS’ (Pratt 1998: 159). 
In reinserting his socially stigmatised body into unexpected spaces 
within society and in this way disrupting social norms, ‘Hervé 
Guibert’ is cast as resisting the abjected position in which medical 
power relations seek to place him. 
Occupying a prominent place in Guibert’s L’Homme au cha-
peau rouge, art collecting can also be said to offer the narrator access 
to a form of spatial resistance. In fact, the very existence of such a 
non-medical theme within what is often argued to be the third part of 
Guibert’s AIDS trilogy, is intriguing and seems to indicate resistance 
of the all-engulfing nature of AIDS. Martine Antle, however, argues 
that art collecting is not as distinct from the narrator’s illness as we 
might presume. She tells us that ‘the endless pursuit of paintings in the

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
170 
text accelerates at the same pace as the advance of the virus’ (Antle 
1997: 192). Clearly in some way interlinked with his illness, then, the 
intratextual Guibert’s interest in paintings can be said to play two ma-
jor spatially-resistant roles in the text. Firstly, it can be seen to be part 
of a strategy of reinforcing the homeliness of his home space: a strat-
egy that enables him to resist the increasingly impersonal, institutional 
spaces in which he is obliged to move. The paintings that the intra-
textual Guibert collects seem to be important in relation to the narra-
tor’s sense of home, being described, for instance, as his new flatmate 
(HCR: 26). Moreover, we are told that 
 
L’achat des tableaux est aussi un substitut de sensualité et de présence, 
car je m’obstine à vivre seul bien qu’on me dise, les médecins et les 
proches, que ce n’est pas le moment, le tableau diffuse dans 
l’appartement une présence familière presque corporelle […] la col-
lection de tableaux fomente aussi et entretient cette illusion que je vais 
continuer à vivre. (Le PC: 192) 
 
Indeed, understood by Alan Buisine to have only one subject, that of 
death, these paintings represent static and unchanging fixtures in a life 
in which normal time structures are increasingly undermined and cha-
otic, and in which early death seems impending.16 Secondly and para-
doxically, whilst offering stability and reassurance, art collecting also 
fulfils the function of generating reasons for the narrator to leave his 
home city of Paris and the confinement that he finds there. As Buisine 
tells us: 
 
Toutes ces fameuses histoires de mafia russe et de KGB, de chantage 
et d’espionnage, de meurtres et de disparitions, de faussaires et de re-
celeurs ont pour fonction d’entraîner l’inertie de la peinture dans une 
sorte de perpétuelle excitation cinétique. Les voyages du narrateur et 
des personnages se succèdent à toute allure – à Rome, à Venise, en 
Suisse, à Corfou, à Londres, à Moscou, à Istanbul, en Afrique, à Abid-
jan et à Ouagadougou - en un vertigineux éclatement géographique de 
la fiction. (Buisine 1997: 103) 
                                                 
16 
Indeed, Martine Antle argues that painting, particularly the autoportrait that 
Yannis paints of the intratextual Guibert, serves to highlight not merely the 
disappearance of the subject, but the subject’s opportunity to escape his own 
body. She tells us: ‘painting, in fact, dissolves corporeal attributes and the 
‘flight of flesh into painting’ reveals only a ‘progressive bleeding of [his] soul 
onto canvas’ (Antle 1997: 186).

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
171 
Reinforcing the homeliness and permanence of his home space as well 
as furnishing him with reasons to travel far away from the regulatory 
control of Paris, ‘Hervé Guibert’’s interest in art may be seen to be 
part of an effort to reappropriate control over his own life. Indeed it is 
to this escape from disciplinary Paris, a prominent theme within Gui-
bert’s AIDS texts, to which my discussion will now turn. 
 
 
Escape: Abjection from or Rejection of Paris 
 
As my discussion has already established, ‘Hervé Guibert’ is pre-
sented as increasingly confined by the medical establishment once his 
status as HIV positive is confirmed, and as developing various spatial 
strategies in order to resist this. In addition, it is pertinent to note that a 
theme of ‘escape’ constitutes one of the most striking spatial leitmotifs 
in Guibert’s AIDS texts, representing the ultimate form of resistance 
and further demonstrating the critical interdependency of body and 
space. 
From the time of his diagnosis as HIV positive, ‘Hervé Guibert’ 
is constructed as using movement in space to escape his predicament. 
He tells us, for instance, that after his diagnosis he returned to Rome 
‘en laissant à Paris le secret de ma maladie’ (ALA: 175). Similarly, on 
just the second page of A l’ami, ‘Hervé Guibert’ tells us that he is ‘à 
Rome, où je suis venu seul, envers et contre tous, fuyant cette poignée 
d’amis qui ont tenté de me retenir, s’inquiétant de ma santé morale’ 
(ALA: 10). The implication that in fleeing to Rome he is in some way 
escaping the worries that surround his normal life is apparent. Whilst 
the destination in such escapes varies, it seems apparent that the site to 
be escaped is usually that of Paris. The intratextual Guibert specifical-
ly tells us, for example: ‘malgré la fatigue du voyage, j’étais rentré 
plus en forme qu’à mon départ. Paris ne me réussissait pas. Un ou 
deux jours d’air parisien, et je me sentais de nouveau crevé’ (HCR: 
110). As Murray Pratt has observed, the rejection of Paris is not uni-
que to Guibert’s AIDS writing. Discussing a corpus of six French 
AIDS writers including Gilles de Barbedette and Christophe Bourdin, 
Pratt states: 
 
All six reject Paris as the prickly and regulatory partisan of the closed 
system, self-containment and abstract alienation – attributes which

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
172 
rather than providing protection, stand accused of promoting mindsets 
and lifestyles propitious to infection, and of promoting the viral, post 
hoc, as the negative simulacrum which justifies its focus on defence. 
(Pratt 1997: 4)  
 
Moreover, Pratt goes on to argue that Paris represents ‘the defensive 
capital which acts as keystone to the nationally fixed hierarchies of vi-
ral thinking’ and that each of these AIDS writers escapes to the South 
of France. This ‘search for the sun’, with which, Pratt suggests, death 
is uncountenanceable, seems to be displaced within Guibert’s texts 
from the South of France to the ‘Ile d’Elbe’. The positive connotations 
with which this place is portrayed, as I argued in section 3.1 of this 
chapter, include qualities of natural beauty and tranquillity as well as 
conduciveness to artistic and writerly production. In seeking out this 
place, then, ‘Hervé Guibert’ finds freedom from the increasingly harsh 
control of his body that occurs in Paris as well as escaping the type of 
death that seems to await him there. 
Travel is also sometimes presented as a way of directly defying 
the doctor. In Le Protocole compassionnel, for example, the narrator 
tells us: 
 
La plupart des malades, à leur dernière extrémité, entreprennent […] 
un voyage, le plus loin possible, que leurs médecins leur déconseillent 
formellement vu leur état, qu’ils font quand même, pour pouvoir en-
suite reprocher à leurs médecins de ne pas les avoir empêchés de par-
tir. (Le PC: 107) 
 
In fact, ‘Hervé Guibert’ seems to escape to more and more distant 
places, with travel playing an increasingly large role in his narratively 
constructed life, as the AIDS oeuvre progresses. I wish to contend that 
a spatial reading of the places to which ‘Hervé Guibert’ is cast as trav-
elling is deeply revealing. Rather than representing an ‘elsewhere’, the 
nature of which is unimportant, it seems that the places to which 
‘Hervé Guibert’ travels constitute the very antithesis of Paris. That is 
to say that whereas Paris is cast within these texts as a site that is in-
creasingly dominated by the attempt to control and restrain AIDS, the 
places to which ‘Hervé Guibert’ travels are quite the opposite. Indeed, 
each of these places can be said to be implicated in some geo-cultural 
reference to the origin of AIDS. This form of travelling, then, repre-
sents not only the desire to escape the Parisian attempt to control the 
HIV virus, but also seems to imply confrontation with the source, or

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
173 
the site of infection of the illness itself. As I established in chapter 1, 
any understanding of home space and cultural belonging necessarily 
implicates not only the domestic space of an individual, but the way 
that this is situated in national and international space. It is to the geo-
cultural significance of the places to which ‘Hervé Guibert’ travels 
that my discussion will now turn in order to establish how he is cast as 
locating himself within the world. 
 
 
3.4 World View 
 
As I argued in the introduction to this chapter, spatio-cultural assump-
tions have underpinned the AIDS crisis from its earliest moments. 
Many nations’ responses to the crisis have been underpinned by a pro-
tectionist urge to shut down borders, restrict the movement of people 
and to be suspicious of foreigners. According to Kristevan thought, it 
is precisely this sort of challenge to the borders of the nation state 
posed by the AIDS crisis that plays a formative role in the definition 
of national identity. As Kristevan exegete Norma Claire Moruzzi ex-
plains: 
 
Defined by the emergence of a body politic and a national language, 
the nation-state must continually maintain the legitimacy of its iden-
tity as a subject through encounters with an other, strangers either out-
side or within its borders. This national preoccupation with alterity 
demands that otherness must constantly be ejected or assimilated, and 
therefore also continually recreated and renewed. (Moruzzi 1993: 142) 
 
The analysis of Guibert’s writing that I have undertaken thus far has 
indicated that once his intratextual self is marked by the threat of HIV, 
he is increasingly caught up in the struggle of French national culture 
to protect and define itself. For example, ‘Hervé Guibert’ is increas-
ingly cast as expelled from the heart of Paris, and is pushed to the 
city’s geographical and cultural margins. Moreover, ‘Hervé Guibert’ 
is flagged as increasingly challenging his own location as unproblem-
atically French as he resists the tightening grip of over-regulatory 
medical control that this represents, and attempts to escape through 
travelling further and further afield. In this section I will examine in 
what ways the HIV virus can be said to impact upon ‘Hervé Guibert’’s 
world view, before moving on to establish where he is textually pre-

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
174 
sented as travelling to, and in what ways might these places be said to 
intersect with the geo-cultural phenomenon of AIDS. 
In a lengthy passage in A l’ami, the narrator lists in considerable 
detail the foreign places to which he and Jules travelled and in which 
they had sexual encounters in the decade before this book begins. This 
list starts with a birthday trip to Vienna in 1981 when Jules had sex 
with ‘un petit masseur blond et frisé qu’il a chopé dans un sauna, Ar-
thur, qui a des taches et des croûtes sur tout le corps’ and continues up 
until Muzil’s death in 1984 (ALA: 61). Whilst the list of places vis-
ited, which includes Vienna, Amsterdam, Budapest, Mexico and Japan 
may seem to bear little relation to the geo-cultural myths surrounding 
AIDS that I discussed in the introduction to this chapter, the implica-
tion is clear: in the narrator’s psyche, the origins of his illness are 
firmly associated with the foreign. 
Moreover, it is evident from early on in A l’ami, that ‘Hervé 
Guibert’ is posited as not entirely dismissing the pervasive cultural 
suspicion that the origins of AIDS could be found in Africa. He recalls 
how, on his deathbed, Muzil says ‘c’est un machin qui doit nous venir 
d’Afrique’. He himself goes on to comment, without clear evidence of 
irony, that ‘le sida, qui a transité par le sang des singes verts, est une   
maladie de sorciers, d’envoûteurs’ (ALA: 17). Placing the burden of 
guilt on Africa, and even, in this case, drawing upon stereotypes of 
black magic and bestiality, has been argued by those such as Susan 
Sontag to emblematise the reflex Western reaction to the HIV virus 
and the threat that this unknown, little understood syndrome imposed. 
As Sontag has explained, such a view draws upon embedded Western 
stereotypes of Africa and primitive behaviour (Sontag 1988: 52). 
Moreover, invoking precisely the sort of culturally protectionist re-
sponse that I have mentioned, this African threat is presented within 
Guibert’s texts as continuing to lurk in the French environment. In A 
l’ami, the explanation proffered by Bill for why there are such strict 
controls on issuing the drug AZT within the French medical system is 
that ‘ils doivent avoir peur que tu revendes ton AZT, à des Africains 
par exemple’. He goes on to explain that ‘en Afrique, à cause de la 
cherté du médicament, on préfère laisser crever les malades et consa-
crer l’argent à la recherche’ (ALA: 60). Later on in the same work, 
having obtained his first supply of AZT, the narrator tells us:

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
175 
j’ai pris à la pharmacie de l’hôpital Rothschild mes cartouches d’AZT 
que j’ai cachés sous mon manteau en partant parce que des dealers sur 
le trottoir me regardaient comme s’ils voulaient me les voler pour des 
potes africains. (ALA: 239) 
 
The fear of needy Africans, then, that Bill suggests troubles those in 
power in the French medical establishment, seems increasingly to be 
espoused by the narrator himself. 
Reflecting other pervasive geo-cultural mythologies of the 
genesis of AIDS, the narrator also entertains various versions of con-
spiracy theory. Again, early in A l’ami, in a speculation about the ori-
gins of HIV virus, ‘Hervé Guibert’ comments that ‘il s’agissait de l’in-
strument d’une guerre biologique lancée tantôt par Brejnev tantôt par 
Reagan’ (ALA: 41). The USSR is regarded by Guibert’s autofiction-
ally rendered self as not only the site from which AIDS might have 
been launched, but also as a particularly frightening example of a na-
tional response to AIDS. ‘Hervé Guibert’ observes, for example, that 
‘en Bavière ou en Union Soviétique, on parlait de tests de contrôle 
obligatoires, aux frontières et pour les tranches «à risque» de la popu-
lation’. Again, drawing attention to the threat that these foreign meas-
ures could pose even to those within French space, the narrator adds 
that such compulsory tests have been ‘plébiscités également par le 
conseiller médical de Le Pen’ (ALA: 153). The US is also evoked in 
these texts as a site in which the AIDS virus could have originated, 
this time as a tool to rid society of ‘undesirables’. In A l’ami, for 
example, Bill is constructed as saying ‘on pourra dire que le sida aura 
été un génocide américain. Les Américains ont précisément ciblé ses 
victimes: les drogués, les homosexuels, les prisonniers’ (ALA: 251). 
In his perception of the world, then, ‘Hervé Guibert’ is posited as far 
from immune to some of the major geo-cultural myths about the ori-
gins of AIDS that circulated in the early phase of the existence of this 
virus. 
Indeed, the narrator’s very construction of his home country, 
France, seems increasingly defined in relation to foreign countries that 
play particular roles in relation to the geo-cultural AIDS imaginary, 
such as the US and Africa. Theorist Joanne P. Sharp argues that ‘the 
constitution of a nation is not only a process which occurs within the 
confines of the nation itself: national identity is also constructed 
through engagement with the international realm’ (Sharp 1996: 105).

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
176 
There is considerable evidence that within Guibert’s texts, France is 
increasingly compared with and judged in relation to other countries 
playing an important role in the AIDS arena. In Le Protocole compas-
sionnel, for example, there is a direct comparison of the anti-AIDS 
‘ACT-UP’ movement, which we are told makes sense in the US and 
has made considerable achievements there, whereas its efforts ‘ne sont 
que des clowneries en France’ (Le PC: 101). Moreover, highlighting 
what he perceives as the more serious situation in the US and the US’s 
scientific advance, he tells us that ‘il ne faut pas recommencer ici les 
bêtises qui ont été faites aux Etats Unis aux débuts de l’AZT’. At this 
time, the narrator goes on to inform us, people bought the drug on the 
black market and, unaware of the correct dosage, overdosed on it (Le 
PC: 100). When Jules obtains some black market DDI for the intra-
textual Guibert, this is posited by the narrator as demonstrating French 
moral superiority. He tells us that when Jules collected the doses of 
this life-prolonging drug, ‘il ne les a pas payées comme aux Etats-
Unis au marché noir, il a juste juré de ne pas parler’ (Le PC: 23). If 
Africa seems to represent guilt and an insidiously seeping infection 
that threatens even those within French borders, then the US is pre-
sented as a technologically and medically advanced nation, the moral 
impoverishment of which must be avoided by France. 
The international landscaped sketched out by Guibert’s earlier 
autofictional AIDS writing, then, is one dominated by the US, the 
USSR and Africa and the geo-cultural mythologies of blame and con-
spiracy that surround them. Whilst in his earlier AIDS texts these 
places are mainly discussed from within French space and often in re-
lation to their diametric opposition to Frenchness, in his later AIDS 
texts these places become the focus of the narrator’s travels. Indeed, 
perhaps the key to understanding this is to be found in the narrator’s 
growing need to escape the disciplinary control of Paris. In placing 
himself in dangerous situations in which a non-institutional, non-
regulated death might occur, ‘Hervé Guibert’ seems to attempt to re-
appropriate his destiny. Early in A l’ami, the death of Muzil seems to 
establish a template, the pattern of which the intratextual Guibert will 
later follow. We are told: 
 
un jour il m’annonça, me sondant étrangement, qu’il avait pris la déci-
sion […] de s’engager au bout du monde avec une équipe de cette as-
sociation humanitaire qu’il soutenait, pour une mission dangereuse

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
177 
d’où il risquait, il me fit comprendre, de ne jamais revenir (ALA: 33-
34). 
 
Considerably later, the autofictional Guibert himself tells us: ‘je conti-
nuai, comme en voulant accompagner Lena à Moscou, à chercher des 
postures de récit dangereuses pour moi’ (HCR: 66). The US does not 
become a focus of ‘Hervé Guibert’’s voyages, perhaps because as a 
reasonably rich, white, homosexual, the narrator knows he would be 
‘correctement soigné’ there (Le PC: 101) and the country does not 
represent sufficient danger. The desire to visit Russia, however, asso-
ciated as it is with the mysterious disappearance, perhaps murder, of 
Lena’s brother, as well as with art fraud and the mysterious workings 
of the KGB, becomes a major focus of interest for ‘Hervé Guibert’. 
Narratively inscribing the material hardships of this place, the narrator 
spends considerable time preparing the necessary provisions that he 
must take in order to survive in the Russian environment (HCR: 138-
139; 144). Perhaps the key to the narrator’s enchantment with the no-
tion of travelling to this place, however, is to be found in its close as-
sociation with disappearance and the narrator’s need to regain control 
over his own death. It is helpful here to return to the description of an 
ideal ‘death clinic’ that the intratextual Guibert elaborated in A l’ami. 
In this text, this environment, imagined by Muzil, is described as fol-
lows: 
 
Ça ne devrait pas être une institution où l’on vient mourir, mais où 
l’on vient faire semblant de mourir. […] il y aurait une petite porte dé-
robée tout au fond de cette clinique, peut-être derrière un de ces ta-
bleaux propres à faire rêver, dans la mélodie engourdissante du nirva-
na d’une piqûre, on se glisserait en douce derrière le tableau, et hop, 
on disparaîtrait sans témoin de l’autre côté du mur, dans l’arrière-cour, 
sans bagage, sans rien dans les  mains, sans nom, devant inventer sa 
nouvelle identité. (ALA: 24-25) 
 
I wish to contend that ‘Hervé Guibert’ associates this notion of an 
ideal death clinic with dangerous travel. In fact, clearly interpellating 
the description of the ideal death clinic, Muzil’s desire to undertake a 
dangerous humanitarian mission at the very end of his life is explained 
by the narrator thus: ‘il allait chercher au bout du monde cette petite 
porte de disparition rêvée derrière le tableau du mouroir idéal’ (ALA: 
34). For ‘Hervé Guibert’, disappearance seems to be not only similarly 
desired, being described in L’Homme au chapeau rouge as ‘un de mes

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
178 
plus grands fantasmes’ (HCR: 81), but is a fantasy that the narrator ac-
tively embraces by undertaking dangerous journeys. On his trip to 
Russia with Lena, the intratextual narrator not only stays in the same 
hotel that Vigo disappeared from, but in the same room. The implica-
tion, then, is clear: in this country of material hardship, political mys-
tery and ideological disintegration, the narrator is able to escape the 
regulatory control and surveillance of his homeland and to embrace 
fantasies of disappearance and the construction of a new identity. 
In his accounts of his travels to Africa, ‘Hervé Guibert’ signals 
that this continent is also associated for him with danger and misfor-
tune. In Le Protocole Compassionnel, for example, he not only de-
scribes Tunisia as ‘ce pays pleins d’adversités’, but goes as far as to 
question his own motivations for undertaking his trip there (Le PC: 
198). Moreover, on his planned trip to Mali with Yannis and Gertrud, 
the tension is heightened by their chosen date of departure. After re-
serving their seats on ‘Air Afrique’ for the 16th January, Gertrud is 
presented as telling the narrator: ‘s’il y a la guerre le 15 […], tu sais il 
y a cet ultimatum des Etats-Unis fixé au 15 pour l’embargo, je n’irai 
pas, ce serait trop risqué, toi tu feras ce que tu voudras avec Yannis’ 
(HCR: 129). Indeed, when requesting his visa, we learn, Yannis is in-
formed: 
 
Les responsables […] disaient que c’était une folie de voyager en 
Afrique par ces temps d’insurrection, où la guerre de surcroît couvait à 
côté. Dans le désert, les Touaregs menaçaient de prendre le pouvoir. 
Les coups d’Etat pleuvaient dans les Etats voisins. (HCR: 130-131) 
 
Expelled from the healthy inside of French culture and rejecting his 
position within marginal, disciplinary French space, the narrator 
seems attracted to the danger of foreign travel. Selecting countries cul-
turally perceived of as highly dangerous, perhaps, ironically, because 
they are geo-culturally implicated as possible sites of the genesis of 
AIDS, the narrator frees his ailing body by moving to spaces repre-
senting the antithesis of his confinement within the rational spaces of 
French disciplinary medical control. Moreover, it is the antithesis of 
rational French reactions to his illness that the narrator actively seeks 
out abroad, as he seems increasingly enchanted with mysticism. Thus 
in L’Homme au chapeau rouge, the narrator considers taking up 
Lena’s offer of sending his photo to a Lebanese Armenian healer she 
knows in the US so that she can pray for his survival (HCR: 68-70).

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
179 
Perhaps most striking of all, however, is the trip to North Africa that 
Guibert’s narrator undertakes to see a Tunisian healer. The record of 
this incident is entitled in Guibert’s tale as ‘Miracle à Casablanca’ and 
seems to represent a return to one of his intratextual self’s earliest un-
derstandings of AIDS as ‘un machin qui doit nous venir d’Afrique. 
[…] Le sida, qui a transité par le sang des singes verts, est une maladie 
de sorciers, d’envoûteurs’ (ALA: 17). As Phillip Winn has argued in 
relation to this observation, ‘sorcery and black magic, almost stereo-
typical in any Western depiction of Africa’s exoticism and dangerous-
ness are brought into the picture and exposed as key elements in the 
imagery of AIDS’ (Winn 1997: 4). Perhaps losing faith in the rational, 
controlling French response to the AIDS syndrome, the narrator seeks 
to embrace the ‘sorciers’ who he believes may be responsible for its 
genesis. Indeed, the narrator’s whole perception of this country is 
over-laden with instinctive impressions and non-rational feelings. It is 
in the previously unknown city of Tangiers that the narrator finds 
 
cette terrasse que je reconnus immédiatement comme un endroit fami-
lier, m’appartenant déjà au même titre qu’à ses autres occupants qui 
me semblaient même pas remarquer ma présence, un lieu totalement 
en accord avec ce temps si curieux, à la fois paralysé, dilaté et accélé-
ré, d’une fin de vie (Le PC: 239). 
 
This terrace, then, previously unknown to the narrator, and on which 
he knows none of the other occupants, seems to represent a place in 
which he feels completely at ease and in harmony. Certainly generat-
ing the same feelings as a home space, this terrace, anonymous, 
sunny, and peopled by similarly imperfect human beings as himself, 
can be said to represent the complete antithesis of rational French 
space and its ideals of control and progress. Not only resisting and re-
jecting French disciplinary spaces, Guibert again demonstrates the in-
extricable interdependency of body and space. His autofictionally ren-
dered self is cast as most at home when located within the monstrous, 
abjected other of French cultural consciousness: the colonially ab-
jected North Africa. 
For ‘Hervé Guibert’, then, sense of home and cultural belonging 
are textually presented as significantly altered by the advent of AIDS. 
As I have argued, ‘Hervé Guibert’’s ‘marks of distinction’ as a privi-
leged member of the French literary elite who situates himself primar-
ily in the coveted spaces of the Parisian Left Bank, are undermined as

Medico-Cultural Spaces in Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Texts 
180 
he is cast as increasingly drawn into stigma-laden medical spaces. 
Textually constructed as using space to both resist and escape this 
process, I have argued that ‘Hervé Guibert’’s relationship with space 
can only be understood by analysing the interdependent nature of 
body and space. From the domestic to the international, then, the ad-
vent of the catastrophic illness of AIDS changes ‘Hervé Guibert’’s 
perception of his home space. From an apparently unproblematic af-
filiation with the space of Paris, Guibert’s autofictionally rendered self 
seems increasingly to desire to escape to a less regulated country, per-
haps one heavily tainted with AIDS connotations.

4. 
Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of  
Self and Place 
 
 
As I argued in chapter 2, Serge Doubrovsky’s considerable reputation 
has been assured by his noteworthy contribution to the theorisation of 
some of the most innovative trends in late twentieth- and early twenty-
first-century literature, particularly within the field of life writing. No 
less important in establishing Doubrovsky’s credentials, however, 
have been the five volumes of his own autofictional writing that are 
the focus of this chapter. These works are situated at the forefront of 
the very literary innovation that Doubrovsky the critic has theorised. 
Far from constituting literary exemplars, conceived solely to prove 
pre-existing critical arguments, it is clear that these works are the 
product of a strong creative impulse on Doubrovsky’s part, which has 
in turn informed his theoretical writings, and a substantial degree of 
personal investment. As my discussion in chapter 2 highlighted, de-
spite the overtly ambiguous nature of the play between fact and fiction 
within Doubrovsky’s autofictions, there is considerable evidence to 
suggest that these works are closely interlinked with the author’s own 
life and identity. In a recent interview Doubrovsky went as far as to 
assert that ‘je considère que dans mes livres j’ai vraiment raconté ma 
vie de façon aussi véridique que si j’avais écrit mon autobiographie’ 
(Doubrovsky in interview with Contat 2001: 120). In fact, rather than 
constituting a mere reflection of selfhood that must by its very pre-
tence to referentiality be flawed, Doubrovsky’s autofictions play an 
active role in constructing his own sense of self. These texts draw 
greatly upon the author’s interest in his unconscious and in many 
ways seem to represent Doubrovsky’s attempt to prolong his psycho-
analytic experiences. As the man himself commented in an interview, 
‘le sens d’une vie n’existe nulle part, n’existe pas. […] il est à con-
struire’ (Doubrovsky in interview with Contat 2001: 77). Just like 
psychoanalysis, then, autofiction provides a forum in which a ‘fiction’ 
of personal history and selfhood with which the individual can live is

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
182 
constructed. In studying Doubrovsky’s autofictions, we are in fact ex-
amining not merely the author’s textual re-presentation, but his re-
construction. It is clear, then, that despite the gap between the author 
and his textually rendered self, these works constitute a site of identity 
construction that is of great importance to Doubrovsky. 
In this chapter, my discussion will examine the ways in which 
Doubrovsky constructs his intratextual self as interacting with space. 
The topic of cultural belonging and home space, whilst not widely ex-
plored by critics, is one of fundamental importance to Doubrovsky’s 
work. In one of the few critical interrogations of this aspect of Dou-
brovsky’s textual self re-construction, for example, Régine Robin ar-
gues that ‘il s’agit bien d’un problème de place’ (Robin 1993b: 76). 
Indeed, the intratextual ‘Doubrovsky’s’1 identity is presented within 
these autofictional texts as nothing less than underpinned by a lifelong 
search for ‘une place’. In Fils, Doubrovsky’s first autofiction, for in-
stance, ‘Doubrovsky’ himself states that 
 
MA PLACE. N’EST JAMAIS LA MIENNE. J’existe. LÀ OÙ JE NE 
SUIS PAS. Là où je suis. J’EXISTE PAS. Si je suis au bord de la mer, 
devant les flots. Je pense: c’est beau la montagne. Si je suis à la mon-
tagne, je rêve d’un lac. (F: 256) 
 
Indeed, so pressing is the sense of dispossession with which ‘Dou-
brovsky’ is presented, that he frequently describes himself in such 
crushing terms as ‘un outlaw, un heimatlos, sans feu ni lieu, sans foi ni 
loi, une âme errante, un Jean-sans-Terre’ (UAS: 369). Moreover, 
Doubrovsky’s autofictionally rendered self is plagued by the refrain: 
‘mon lieu sur terre mon canton de l’univers mon coin d’espace suis 
OÙ mais OÙ mazout’ (F: 111). The quest for ‘une place’ that per-
vades these works, then, is both geographical and cultural, both literal 
and figurative, and it plays a strikingly pervasive role in Doubrovsky’s 
autofictional constructions of selfhood. 
In chapter 3, I argued that Guibert’s autofictionally rendered 
self’s sense of belonging in space is textually constructed as having 
                                                 
1 
In order to reflect the difference between the author and narrator-protagonist 
of Doubrovsky’s writing, from now on the term Doubrovsky will be used to 
refer to the extratextual author and ‘Doubrovsky’ to refer to the intratextual 
narrator-protagonist.

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
183 
been radically affected by the advent of the catastrophic illness of 
AIDS. In Doubrovsky’s autofictions, the sense of cultural displace-
ment is both more pervasive and more deeply interwoven in his tex-
tual avatar’s identity. In fact, ‘Doubrovsky’’s frequent self-description 
as ‘un juif errant’ is a telling indicator of the intersections of ethnicity, 
culture and geographical location that I will argue to underpin the 
identity of Doubrovsky’s narrator. Just as I argued in chapter 2 that 
the experience of growing up in France in the Second World War, 
which culminated in him spending nine months in hiding, is a primary 
motivation for Doubrovsky’s writing, so it is presented within these 
works as a significant influence upon ‘Doubrovsky’’s identity and re-
lationship with space. Indeed, it would be hard to infer from these 
texts anything other than the highly formative nature of the anti-
Semitism of 1930s and 1940s France upon Doubrovsky’s autofictional 
avatar’s identity.2 Moreover, despite Doubrovsky’s overt eschewing of 
chronological life writing narratives, I will argue in this chapter that a 
progression, or a logical follow-on, can be identified between his con-
struction of his textual avatar’s sense of ethnic and cultural disposses-
sion during childhood, and his relationship with space in adulthood. In 
his depictions of adulthood, ‘Doubrovsky’’s spatial anxiety remains 
clearly in evidence in the form of the intricate spatial structure woven 
for his life: a structure that compels him to move regularly between 
the US and France in a phenomenon that has constituted the focus of 
considerable critical attention (Chiantaretto 1995: 164; Robin 2000-
2001b: 192-209). 
This chapter will, then, seek to characterise the nature of ‘Dou-
brovsky’’s relationship with space as it is portrayed in Doubrovsky’s 
life writings in order to gain insight into this autofictional articulation 
of identity. In elaborating my reading, I will draw upon existing criti-
cal material as well as Doubrovsky’s autofictional corpus, and will 
seek to bring my arguments into dialogue with the work of theorists 
such as Michel de Certeau and Michel Foucault. In the first section of 
this chapter, I will focus on the detail of Doubrovsky’s self-inscriptive 
and self-reconstructive writings in order to establish how his autofic-
tional avatar’s childhood experience of space and place is presented as 
                                                 
2 
For a discussion of this period, see Marrus and Paxton (1995: chapter 2) and 
Zuccotti (1993: chapter 1).

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
184 
translating into a preoccupation with movement and dispossession in 
adulthood. I will consider the dialectic of confinement and liberation 
that pervades these works, before concluding the chapter with a dis-
cussion that links the role of spatial division with that of the division 
of identity within Doubrovsky’s work, drawing upon Lacanian theory 
in order to reach a deeper level of understanding. 
 
 
4.1 An Unsettled Sense of Belonging in a Stable World 
 
In these life writing texts, ‘Doubrovsky’ is presented as having been 
born in the ninth arrondissement of Paris and as having growing up in 
and around this city. His early experiences of place in this city are fre-
quently re-narrated and cited as formative elements of his cultural 
identity. Externally referential landmarks are evoked in order to imply 
that ‘Doubrovsky’’s mental map of Paris is dominated by places with 
specific family connections that root him firmly into a potentially im-
personal environment. His nuclear family’s home space, for example, 
is depicted firstly as centred around his father’s tailor shop in central 
Paris, before becoming that of ‘la grande propriété ancestrale du Vési-
net’ (UAS: 66) in the outskirts of the city. The latter home space is 
portrayed in an idealised light (LPC: 62; 147-148; 163), as we are told 
that it was originally established by ‘Doubrovsky’’s grandfather and 
that it remains a feature of ‘Doubrovsky’’s cultural and mental land-
scape long after his mother has died and it has been sold (UAS: 145-
148). Such a landmark is clearly presented as a site of stability for 
‘Doubrovsky’, constituting a symbol of continuity and selfhood for 
him long after we are told that it has ceased to feature in his daily life. 
‘Doubrovsky’’s narrated map and, to draw on the terminology 
used in the work of Pierre Nora (1984: VII), his ‘géographie mentale’, 
is also narratively presented as encompassing physical landmarks 
drawn from the wider Parisian environment: the ‘rue de la Tour’ is 
cited as the home of his mother before the First World War; ‘118, rue 
de la Pompe’ remains the home of ‘Doubrovsky’’s uncle, Henri 
Weitzmann, right up until Weitzmann’s death as an old man. Perhaps 
most importantly, the Trocadéro is cast as the site of shared family en-
tertainment (UAS: 67; F: 232-233; LLB: 35). As Régine Robin has 
pointed out, ‘toute la famille communie dans l’amour du spectacle. 
L’oncle est limonadier en chef au vieux Trocadéro, ils vont tous au

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
185 
théâtre voir Mounet-Sully, Paul Mounet et Sarah Bernhardt’ (Robin 
2000-2001b: 196). The significance of these points of reference is tex-
tually constructed as continuing even in ‘Doubrovsky’’s adulthood as, 
having spent many years abroad, his walks around Paris are portrayed 
as remaining coloured and even directed by memories of past family 
landmarks. Traversing Paris on the fortieth anniversary of VE day, for 
example, Doubrovsky’s narrator in Un Amour de soi tells us that 
 
[je] connais le terrain. C’est mon territoire immémorial. Je l’ai arpenté 
avant de naître. Avant le palais de Chaillot, j’ai habité le vieux Troca-
déro. Pas encore venu au monde, j’y logeais depuis des décennies. 
(UAS: 33)   
 
Memories of the shared family heritage of stories passed down to 
‘Doubrovsky’ from his mother and uncle as well as of his own lived 
experience are presented, then, as continuing to anchor him into the 
social and material space of Paris (F: 24-25; AV: 52 and 147; LLB: 
33; UAS: 67 and 96). In Laissé pour conte, for example, he tells us 
that ‘ma promenade traverse un siècle entier, mais impalpable, j’ai 
mes racines dans le passé, au présent aucune présence, rien que des 
restes...’ (LPC: 211). Doubrovsky constructs his autofictionally ren-
dered self’s identity as fundamentally bound-up with the city of his 
childhood, the specific spaces of which he must frequently re-
experience in order to recapture his sense of self. For ‘Doubrovsky’’s 
spatially anchored identity, then, the ‘home space’ of Paris is located 
in a complex intersection of time, space and memory. 
The space of Paris is clearly presented by Doubrovsky as repre-
senting stability and continuity for his autofictional avatar, providing 
him with some degree of cultural anchorage. This city is, however, as 
many urban theorists have recognised, a plural, shifting and some-
times contradictory space that must be continually remapped, men-
tally, narratively and physically. Michael Sheringham, for example, in 
his 1996 study Parisian Fields, argues that ‘the cultural space of the 
city – the way it exists in the minds of its inhabitants and visitors […] 
is […] always involved in a process of transformation without estab-
lished boundaries or categorical restrictions’ (Sheringham 1996: 2-3). 
Indeed, in ‘Doubrovsky’’s repeated citation and renegotiations of 
Paris, multiple readings of the city are effected, highlighting the com-
plex ways in which within it meanings and identities are continually 
reinvented. Perhaps most consistently within his narratives, Dou-

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
186 
brovsky depicts the home space of Paris as a site of renewal and a 
source of life-giving force to which his textual double must return fre-
quently in order to carry on living (LPC: 272). In L’Après-vivre, for 
example, after a disturbing incident of sexual impotency in the US, 
‘Doubrovsky’ comments ‘signal d’alarme, il est temps de rentrer en 
France. […] Je vais me reconstruire à Paris’ (AV: 119). The city is 
continually associated with his own mother, as well as often being 
linked with the maternal in general. Again referring to the incident of 
impotency, for example, Doubrovsky’s narrator tells us that he must 
‘retour[ner] à Paris, au bercail’ (AV: 121). Moreover, so closely asso-
ciated is Paris with the maternal in ‘Doubrovsky’’s account that the 
death of his mother has a serious impact. Returning to the city for the 
first time after this event, ‘Doubrovsky’ tells us ‘PARIS EST MORT 
ma mère ma France la France disparue’ (F: 332) and references to it 
recur throughout the autofictions (UAS: 66; LPC: 191). Clearly, for 
‘Doubrovsky’, then, the sense of belonging that he feels within the 
city of Paris is deeply bound up with childhood memories and family 
connections, to the extent that the death of his mother seems synony-
mous with the death of the city. The link between ‘Doubrovsky’’s 
mère and his pays matrie will comprise a crucial focus of my argu-
ment in the last section of this chapter. 
In L’Après-vivre, Paris takes on perhaps the most striking form 
of all, however, as the city is mapped out as an allegory of ‘Dou-
brovsky’’s most intimate physical and emotional self. So strong is 
‘Doubrovsky’’s sense of affiliation with this space that the city is de-
picted as a friend whose life runs parallel to and mirrors that of ‘Dou-
brovsky’ himself. This is particularly evident in ‘Démolition’, one of 
the structuring strands of L’Après-vivre, in which the buildings of his 
Parisian quartier are described as ‘mes voisines’ and we are told that 
‘nous vieillissons ensemble, nous sommes d’un autre âge’ (AV: 12). A 
clear parallel is drawn here between ‘Doubrovsky’ himself and the Pa-
risian cityscape. In this, a clear link can be seen with the arguments of 
Michel de Certeau that I discussed in section 1.0.5 of this monograph. 
De Certeau stresses that rather than possessing a Godlike, bird’s eye 
view down over space, places are brought to life and given meaning 
by the everyday movements of people. In ‘Doubrovsky’’s case, more 
than merely feeling a sense of special belonging to particular places, 
his sense of affiliation with the space of Paris is so strong that he sug-
gests the city to parallel his own identity. The comparison is made

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
187 
more acute by the desperate state of both: just as ‘Doubrovsky’ is de-
picted as grieving for his dead wife, Ilse, and contemplates the crum-
bling fragments of the life he built with her, so the decaying urban 
fabric is awaiting destruction, its future unknown. The demolition of 
‘Doubrovsky’’s Parisian surroundings will leave a gaping hole, echo-
ing, perhaps exacerbating, the void that Ilse’s death has left in ‘Dou-
brovsky’ himself. As Michel de Certeau argues, spaces are ‘brought to 
life’, or in this case put to death, by the presence of bodies within 
them (de Certeau 1990: 148). For ‘Doubrovsky’, so strong is his sense 
of identification with the spaces of Paris that he perceives the future of 
the urban fabric as synonymous with his own. 
Evidently, the space of Paris is constructed in Doubrovsky’s 
autofictions as highly significant for ‘Doubrovsky’. Paris is textually 
presented as the clearly demarcated space in which his childhood took 
place and to which he retains a strong sense of affiliation. Cast as re-
maining important throughout his life, the city’s meanings and asso-
ciations are not, however, immobile. Across his accounts of selfhood, 
Doubrovsky retells and recasts Paris in a number of roles so that the 
city emblematises, variously, the maternal; the site of life-giving 
force; and a peer undergoing the same physical assaults and emotional 
trials as ‘Doubrovsky’ himself. However, if the city of Paris can be 
said to be the uncontested, if multi-layered, home space of ‘Dou-
brovsky’’s childhood, a space presented as that in which his early ex-
periences of the world all took place and which remains significant 
throughout his life, it would be misleading to accept Paris as an un-
problematic home space in which ‘Doubrovsky’’s sense of cultural 
belonging is firmly rooted. I wish to contend that two particular fac-
tors can be identified as of paramount importance in the creation of 
‘Doubrovsky’’s complex and even conflictual sense of geographical 
identity: diverse family roots and the ideological climate of his forma-
tive years. 
 
 
Family Roots 
 
In the first piece in Doubrovsky’s autofictional corpus, Doubrovsky’s 
narrator cites his family name as a label that alienates him from what 
he feels to be his real origins: ‘un nom à coucher dehors, d’où que je 
sors. Père, Tchernigov. Grand-père, Dombrowicz. Ça se dit né à Paris,

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
188 
dans le 9e’ (F: 105). Much later in the autofictional oeuvre, ‘Dou-
brovsky’ invokes himself as ‘Julien-Serge, Janus Bifrons, toujours di-
visé, scindé, schizé’ (LPC: 238). Doubrovsky presents his textual ava-
tar as torn between an inner feeling of being French and a knowledge 
that his family’s ethnico-cultural heritage is considerably more com-
plex. This ambiguity is also evident in the relationship that ‘Dou-
brovsky’ is presented as having with language. Unable to speak Yid-
dish or alsacien, Doubrovsky’s narrator tells us that he is unsure of the 
language in which his mother articulates her pet names for him: 
 
c’est moi poupele meins c’est moi me connais pas me comprends pas 
[…] ma mère qui m’appelait ainsi j’ai la langue des autres la mienne il 
me reste à l’inventer je l’ai perdue quelque part entre Tchernigov-
Ukraine Dombrowicz-Pologne entre deux grands-pères entre deux 
guerres ma mère mi-rue-de-la-Tour mi-Alsace ma grand-mère de 
Strasbourg. (F: 123) 
 
‘Doubrovsky’ is, then, cast as unsettled by the unfamiliarity of his 
family’s familiar names for him, and as left feeling that some part of 
his cultural heritage has been lost. The disjuncture between ‘Dou-
brovsky’’s actual situation and his familial heritage is clearly implied 
to play a formative role in the construction of his identity, creating in-
ner conflict. In Fils, for example, Doubrovsky’s narrator affirms that 
‘je m’épelle Doubrovsky en caractères cyrilliques ou hébraïques peux 
pas me lire peux pas m’écrire traduit trahi […] j’ai disparu dans 
l’alphabet romain avalé par la langue de Descartes’ (F: 124). This 
suggests that in not speaking the languages of his ancestors he feels he 
has committed an act of betrayal that undermines the authenticity of 
his identity. In fact, a direct link can be seen here between Dou-
brovsky-the-author’s relationship with the French language, and that 
which he constructs for his intratextual self. In a recent interview, 
Doubrovsky himself specifically addressed his own feeling at having 
been gifted in the study of French language and literature at school 
and yet having been denied a sense of belonging to French culture by 
the society around him. He asserted that ‘je jongle avec tous les mots 
de cette langue, ce sont mes comptes à régler avec la France’ (Dou-
brovsky 1992: 131-183). Clara Lévy, a sociologist who has specifi-
cally addressed the question of Doubrovsky’s ethnic identity, help-
fully points out that it is not uncommon for precisely this sort of feel-
ing of foreignness in relation to ‘la langue d’écriture’ to act as a

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
189 
source of inspiration for French Jewish writers (Lévy 1984: 100). 
Lévy goes on to suggest that such writers may become so attached to 
their ‘langue d’écriture’ that it is in this that they root their cultural 
identity (1984: 100-103). Whilst this may, indeed, be true for Dou-
brovsky-the-author, it is certainly clear that his autofictional avatar is 
presented as being deeply unsettled, rather than inspired, by his sense 
of linguistic dispossession. 
If ‘Doubrovsky’’s sense of belonging is shown to be unsettled 
by his very name and his family’s relationship with the French lan-
guage, then the parental voices that reverberate across the autofic-
tional texts that chart his existential trajectory constitute further desta-
bilizing influences. ‘Doubrovsky’ regularly cites the formative paren-
tal messages that we are told he received during his childhood (LLB: 
270-271; F: 124 and 248-258), and tells us that these messages ‘m’ont 
pétri de contradictions’ (LLB: 275-276). In Le Livre brisé, a clear pic-
ture is painted of the ambiguous parental expectations and aspirations 
to which Doubrovsky’s autofictional avatar is constructed as having 
been subjected as a child. Projecting himself back into his childhood 
self, Doubrovsky’s narrator tells us: 
 
je m’appelle Doubrovsky, je suis un bon petit Français: tricolore et in-
colore. On me dit sans cesse, tu n’es pas différent des autres, on me 
répète à satiété, rappelle-toi d’où tu sors. On a fabriqué un gosse à 
l’identité androgyne: un juif non juif. (LLB: 276) 
 
Doubrovsky portrays his autofictionally rendered self’s parents, then, 
as passing on a paradoxical view of the family’s place in the world: 
we are told that they simultaneously urge their son to remain faithful 
to the family’s humble origins and incite him to achieve all he can 
(LPC: 334). In short, ‘Doubrovsky’ is constructed as compelled, 
somehow, to take advantage of the opportunities offered to the French 
bourgeoisie without actually becoming either entirely French or en-
tirely bourgeois. 
The complexity of these parental messages is heightened by the 
evocation of a constant refrain inciting the family to conform to the 
mores of the society around them (F: 124). The mother’s remembered, 
re-cited voice punctuates the narrative with the reminder that, in order 
to play a part in French society, ‘il faudra faire un effort supplémen-

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
190 
taire, être plus français qu’un Français’ (LLB: 271). From her, we are 
told that ‘Doubrovsky’ learns 
 
le Discours de la Méthode Assimil similitude pareil aux autres il faut 
être comme tout le monde ne pas se faire remarquer perdu dans la fou-
le au restaurant ne pas parler trop haut dans la rue ne pas crier trop fort 
ne pas avoir le nez trop long (F: 124). 
 
The suggestion is clear that social acceptance and a sense of belonging 
can only be achieved through the performance of learned, perhaps 
even caricatured, ‘French’ behaviour and the repression of their ‘natu-
ral’ selves. Alienated by the distance of his lived experience from his 
family roots and lifestyles, the young ‘Doubrovsky’ is therefore con-
structed as further alienated from his contemporary surroundings by 
the perpetual parental voices that remind him that he is different and 
potentially unacceptable. 
 
 
Ideological Context 
 
As many historians and theorists have documented,3 the escalating 
waves of anti-Semitism that characterised France in the 1930s, exac-
erbated by economic depression and popular perception of increased 
levels of immigration, culminated in the extremely repressive experi-
ence of the Nazi Occupation of France in the 1940s. To adapt the ter-
minology of Kathleen M. Kirby, this Occupation and the prevalence 
of anti-Semitism in French society could be termed a ‘crisis of the 
boundaries of public space’ (Kirby 1996: 52), in which distorted 
power relations introduced new dangers into the environment for par-
ticular citizens, casting upon them new, stigmatised identities.4 A de-
liberate impulse to, at the very least, highlight the ‘difference’ of Jews 
was fundamental to the anti-Semitic project, emblematised by the 
compulsory marking of Jews with ‘une étoile jaune’. References to the 
                                                 
3 
See, for example, Marrus and Paxton (1995); Zuccotti (1993); and Kedward 
(1985). 
4 
In fact, a clear parallel can be seen here with the way in which I argued 
‘Hervé Guibert’’s ability to move in space to have been affected once he was 
marked by the socially unacceptable illness of AIDS.

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
191 
enforced wearing of the yellow star recur in Doubrovsky’s texts, 
sometimes being described by ‘Doubrovsky’ as ‘mon stigmate jaune’ 
(LPC: 34). Worn on the chest at all times, this physical mark of differ-
ence and shame has been described by Régine Robin as ‘un signe de 
visibilité’ (2000-2001b: 197) comparable to circumcision. Unlike the 
‘marks of distinction’ that I discussed in Chapter 3, which function as 
ways in which individuals can express their cultural superiority, these 
marks of visibility continually jeopardised the wearer’s safety whilst 
moving through the spaces of everyday life. References to the fear in-
voked by wearing the Jewish yellow star are particularly evident in 
Laissé pour conte, the last work in Doubrovsky’s autofictional corpus, 
indicating Doubrovsky’s intention to signal the ongoing significance 
of this experience (LPC: 74; 115; 199; 329; 356. Also F: 303). As Pat-
rick Saveau has remarked, in ‘Doubrovsky’’s case this visible marking 
enforced a confrontation with ethnicity and cultural belonging, caus-
ing him first to reject Jewishness and claim his ancestors to be the 
Gauls, then to seek to establish his cultural heritage in classical litera-
ture (Saveau 1999: 28), a point to which I will return below when I 
discuss ‘Doubrovsky’’s construction of a French identity in the US. 
Perhaps an even more serious threat to the stability of ‘Dou-
brovsky’’s cultural identity is textually presented as that cornerstone 
of nazi ideology, accepted and even put into practice by a significant 
number of French people: ethnic cleansing.5 This is inscribed within 
these works in the form of Doubrovsky’s narrator’s recollection of 
slogans being broadcast across the place de la Concorde in the heart 
of French national space, describing Jews as ‘vermin’ and inciting the 
populous to ‘épur[er] la race française’ (LLB: 13 and 21; LPC: 410 
and 411). Doubrovsky presents his intratextual double as being left in 
no doubt about his lack of place in the ‘new’ French society that these 
slogans called for (LPC: 242). Moreover, cast as having been brought 
up to believe in the positive, enriching nature of culture, the ‘Exposi-
tion: le juif et la France, entrée gratuite pour les écoliers en groupe’ 
                                                 
5 
Marrus and Paxton argue that although the Vichy government did not plan the 
mass extermination of Jews, and merely intended to enforce re-emigration, the 
radical measures effected by the Nazis would not have been possible without 
the active collaboration of the French in ethnic cleansing. The Vichy Govern-
ment was one of the only countries in Europe to hand over Jews to the Nazis 
for deportation from non-occupied zones (Marrus and Paxton 1995: xvii).

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
192 
(LLB: 16) is depicted as a particularly harsh shock for the young 
‘Doubrovsky’. The Nazi philosophies that increasingly invaded the 
space of his youth, then, are textually presented as casting upon ‘Dou-
brovsky’ a feeling of difference and of not being truly ‘French’. 
Doubrovsky’s narrator portrays a combination of diverse family 
roots, complex ethnico-cultural heritage and the powerful anti-Semitic 
climate of his formative years as playing important roles in the gen-
eration of an increasingly unsettled and problematic sense of cultural 
belonging for ‘Doubrovsky’. I wish to contend that these factors can 
be best understood in Doubrovsky’s autofictions through an analysis 
of the complex intersections of the body and space. That is to say that 
‘Doubrovsky’’s sense of spatio-cultural belonging is presented as sig-
nificantly influenced by the impact of discourses such as anti-Semi-
tism upon his physical identity. I will now scrutinize this phenome-
non, drawing upon the work of Michel Foucault and engaging with his 
argument that rather than constituting biologically given, immutable 
structures, bodies are fabricated through discourse as an effect of 
power and knowledge.6 
Alan Petersen develops Foucault’s argument about the con-
struction of bodies through social discourse in a monograph entitled 
Unmasking the Masculine: ‘Men’ and ‘Identity’ in a Sceptical Age 
(1998). In this, Petersen specifically addresses the ways in which ra-
cism operates through the imputation of negative characteristics to the 
bodies of particular peoples, and the strategic deployment of biologi-
cal differences in order to draw boundaries between dominant groups 
in society and ‘Others’. Carrying both the ‘marks of visibility’ that I 
discussed earlier, circumcision and ‘l’étoile jaune’, ‘Doubrovsky’’s 
formulations of self-image are depicted as at least partially con-
structed through the eye of the ‘Other’, in this case, the anti-Semite. 
Directly engaging with the voice of the Exposition le juif et la France, 
for example, ‘Doubrovsky’ tells us ‘cheveux pas crépus mais ondulés, 
yeux comme tout le monde, le nez, là, accentué, un peu épais, front 
fuyant, j’ai le type’ (LPC: 331; LLB: 214). The degree to which these 
discourses are internalised by ‘Doubrovsky’ is evident in his frequent 
expressions of dissatisfaction with his own appearance (F: 41 and 59). 
                                                 
6 
This argument is developed by Michel Foucault in Surveiller et punir, a work 
that I discussed in more detail in chapter 3.

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
193 
Moreover, Petersen argues that in relation to Jewish ethnicity, the 
denigration of masculinity has often been tied up in anti-Semitic dis-
course. The act of circumcision, for instance, is connoted in anti-
Semitic discourse with notions of diseased sexuality, flawed masculin-
ity and the potential to corrupt (Petersen 1998: 45-46). In ‘Dou-
brovsky’’s case, gender and sexual identity are certainly shown to be 
the site of anti-Semitic stigma. Doubrovsky’s narrator tells us ‘forme 
du zob, politique’ (F: 105) and goes as far as to describe his circumci-
sion as ‘la morte entre les jambes’. ‘Doubrovsky’’s physical identity, 
as it is cast upon him by social discourse, is textually represented as 
the reason not merely for his sense of lack of popularity with French 
women (LPC: 331) and his nine months in hiding, but to an enduring 
sense of cultural alienation within the very space that he is cast as 
feeling was his childhood home. 
Again, parental voices are cited as further complicating ‘Dou-
brovsky’’s ethnico-cultural identity. His father’s voice is continually 
recalled in the narrative, and he is posited as having continually ex-
horted his son to exercise during his nine months of confinement de-
spite his hunger and lack of food (LLB: 203-204). In response to 
‘Doubrovsky’’s complaint ‘je dis au père, à quoi ça sert, ces exerci-
ces, quand on n’a rien à manger?’ his father is cast as having replied 
sternly ‘il faut, mon gars, il faut’ (LLB: 203). ‘Doubrovsky’’s father is 
presented as the unwitting tool through which the anti-Semitic con-
struction of the male, Jewish body as ‘unmasculine’ and weak is per-
petuated. Within the narrative he is posited as asserting, for example, 
that ‘je déteste les femmelettes’ (LLB: 116) and as reproaching his 
wife for pampering ‘Doubrovsky’: ‘tu vas en faire une poule mouil-
lée!’ (LLB: 114). In inciting his son to develop his strength, take 
physical risks and undertake other forms of masculine behaviour, this 
paternal figure is cast as unwittingly perpetuating the anti-Semitic so-
cial construction of the Jewish body as ‘feminised and soft’ (see Pe-
tersen 1998: 46) and transporting the discourses dominating public 
space into the private space of the home. 
In the first section of this investigation of Doubrovsky’s auto-
fictional construction of spatial identity I have argued that despite por-
traying his textual avatar’s childhood as having taken place within a 
relatively stable location, he remains plagued by a sense of lack of be-
longing. This is narratively presented as the result of the combined ef-
fects of diverse geographical, social and ethnic roots, references to

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
194 
which reverberate throughout the narrative recollections of the voices 
of his parents. Doubrovsky’s intratextual self’s complex heritage is 
constructed as having been further problematised by the contemporary 
ideological context of his youth, including the dominant discourse of 
anti-Semitism during the Occupation of Paris, a city that I have argued 
to be textually presented as of great importance to ‘Doubrovsky’’s 
identity. Moreover, the denigration of his masculinity by anti-Semitic 
discourse reinforces our awareness of the importance of body and 
space in the construction of a sense of cultural belonging. The feeling 
of lack of belonging and dispossession evident in ‘Doubrovsky’’s rec-
ollections of childhood will now be argued to be cast within Dou-
brovsky’s writings as translated into a leitmotif of displacement and 
exile in his textually constructed adulthood. 
 
 
From Cultural Dispossession to Spatial Displacement 
 
In addition to his depiction of Jewish ethnicity in twentieth-century 
France, one of the most striking aspects of Doubrovsky’s œuvre is to 
be found in the complex spatial structure around which his textual 
avatar’s life is presented as built. Freed from his time in hiding, ‘Dou-
brovsky’ is depicted as quickly embarking upon the first of the over-
seas trips with which, we are told, his adult life is punctuated. Engag-
ing with the work of those critics who have discussed this aspect of 
‘Doubrovsky’’s identity,7 I wish in what follows to focus upon Dou-
brovsky’s relationship with space as it is depicted in his accounts of 
adulthood. In particular, I will argue that ‘Doubrovsky’’s experience 
of cultural and social displacement as a child and adolescent is  narra-
tively presented as a key causal factor in his later dependency on spa-
tial displacement in the search for reconciliation with his own identity. 
The two years that ‘Doubrovsky’ is posited as having spent at 
Trinity College, Dublin are depicted as a relatively happy, construc-
tive period during which, once over the initial culture-shock, Dou-
brovsky’s narrator begins to find his feet and establish himself as an 
independent adult (LPC: 115-118). His relationship with the US, how-
ever, is cast as considerably more complex. Far from constituting the 
                                                 
7 
See particularly Robin (2000-2001b).

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
195 
locus of occasional visits that remain peripheral to his autofictionally 
rendered sense of self, this country is continually cited within Dou-
brovsky’s texts as playing a key role throughout the time span encom-
passed by the autofictional œuvre. Doubrovsky’s narrator often de-
scribes this place as ‘le Nouveau Monde’ (UAS: 47; LPC: 50), and 
seems strongly attracted to the American ‘melting pot’ of cultures, ‘le 
creuset américain’ (LPC: 132). In this environment, the dominant cul-
tural values are depicted as being those of enterprise and self-motiva-
tion rather than the ideals of racial purity and long-established national 
roots that, I have argued, are shown to predominate in the France of 
‘Doubrovsky’’s youth (LPC: 133). Particularly significant, perhaps, is 
the description of the US as ‘la Terre Promise’ (F: 128). The religious 
connotations of this phrase are clear, and if ‘Doubrovsky’ is not pre-
sented as becoming a more ardent Jew during his time in the US, it is 
certainly clear that Judaism seems a more easily accommodated part 
of his identity here than it was in France. In Fils, for example, Dou-
brovsky’s narrator tells us that ‘je me renjuive à New York Céline di-
sait Jew York des retrouvailles je me remange gefűllte-fisch au raifort 
c’est bon borachtch’ (F: 126). The cultural diversity that Doubrovsky 
depicts in the US is presented as permitting his autofictionally ren-
dered self to reappropriate certain aspects of his Jewish cultural ori-
gins. Perhaps most important of all is the fact that ‘tout le monde est 
circoncis l’Amérique a pas de prépuce aux pissotières toutes les pines 
sont pareilles les zobs sans bonnets bas la culotte ici ça servirait à 
rien’ (F: 126). Even physically the space of the US is portrayed as al-
lowing ‘Doubrovsky’ to conform, and as freeing him from the stigma 
and danger that the discursive regulation of his body produced in Oc-
cupied France. Revealingly, he tells us that ‘j’ai changé d’espace, 
d’espèce’ (F: 59). 
However, if spatial displacement in the form of migration to the 
US is portrayed as offering ‘Doubrovsky’ a certain degree of freedom 
from the repression that he experienced in France, it would be wrong 
to infer that once established in the US his sense of belonging is cast 
as simple, unified and unproblematic. ‘Doubrovsky’’s sense of be-
longing and spatial identity is portrayed as remaining irremediably 
torn between France and the US throughout his adulthood. Regularly 
moving between the two countries, the intricate spatial structure that 
‘Doubrovsky’ is depicted as building for his life is shown as having 
been facilitated by his ascent of the academic hierarchy and his grow-

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
196 
ing ability to dictate the terms of his own employment. Indeed, just as 
I argued in chapter 3 that ‘Hervé Guibert’’s ‘cultural capital’ facili-
tated his movements in privileged spaces in Paris and Italy, so ‘Dou-
brovsky’’s acquisition of educational ‘marks of distinction’ permit 
him to move between the US and France.8 From spending the entire 
academic year in the US followed by a three-month summer vacation 
in France, he is eventually able to command a job allowing him to 
spend alternate years in Paris and New York (LLB: 193-194). 
If the US is where ‘Doubrovsky’ is portrayed as earning a liv-
ing, marrying his first wife and establishing a family home, it is to his 
patrie that he is nevertheless presented as continually drawn back. As 
Doubrovsky’s narrator explicitly acknowledges in L’Après-vivre: 
 
Je porte à jamais en moi une France ambivalente. [… La guerre] me 
revient toujours, remonte soudain en moi comme une lointaine nausée. 
Pourquoi je suis parti en Amérique. Tout le monde s’appelle Dou-
brovsky, tout le monde est circoncis. (AV: 31) 
 
As I suggested in the introduction to this chapter, then, despite Dou-
brovsky’s rejection of the chronological narrative, a clear progression 
can be identified within the identity he constructs for his autofiction-
ally rendered self. That is to say that the cultural dispossession that 
‘Doubrovsky’ is depicted as feeling in France during his youth is con-
structed in such a way as to suggest that it comprises a central motiva-
tion for the spatial displacements, particularly his migrations to the 
US, that characterise ‘Doubrovsky’’s adult identity. 
Despite the essential role that Doubrovsky constructs for the US 
within these texts, which as I have argued is cast as the result of re-
pression and persecution in France, there is an irrefutable sense that 
his autofictional avatar’s identity remains firmly grounded in the 
space of France. That is to say that, underneath the layers of cultural 
dispossession, ‘Doubrovsky’ is cast as feeling that his true home is 
France, and it is to this country that he feels compelled to return. The 
constant carrying of both American and French wallets and identifica-
tion documents is a particularly appropriate allegory of this: 
                                                 
8 
In this argument I am adopting Bourdieu’s notion of ‘cultural capital’ and 
‘marks of distinction’ as discussed in section 3.1 of this study.

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
197 
La vérité, je ne l’ai pas dans la tête, mais dans la poche. La poche-
portefeuille. Dans mon portefeuille français. Le noir. Quand je change 
de portefeuille, à l’arrivée à Paris. Toujours avec moi, dans ma ser-
viette. Après la douane, je change. C’est mon vrai passeport. Mes piè-
ces d’identité. Ont pas la même taille ici et là. Suis plus le même. (F: 
167) 
 
Quite clearly, Doubrovsky wishes to portray France as the real home 
of his autofictionally rendered self, the real place of belonging from 
which his narrative counterpart is compelled to exile himself by his 
early experiences, however impermanently. He is, however, constan-
tly pulled back to France, and as Régine Robin has highlighted, ‘il ne 
peut pas envisager de prendre sa retraite ailleurs qu’à Paris, il a besoin 
du français comme écrivain, comme horizon. Rien d’américain malgré 
toutes ces années à New York’ (2000-2001b: 196). Cast as becoming 
increasingly dependent in old age upon his unequivocally American 
daughters (LLB: 81), however, as well as feeling a growing desire to 
return to Paris, ‘Doubrovsky’ is presented as destined never to escape 
his spatial dislocation, and his permanent sense of lack. 
It is also evident that the conflictual nature of the spatial iden-
tity that Doubrovsky affords his autofictionally rendered self, in par-
ticular the incongruity of feeling fundamentally French yet being de-
nied this by those around him, is presented as a major motivation for 
his continual movements across space. For example, the distance that 
‘Doubrovsky’ is presented as having established between France and 
himself seems to operate like a strategic retreat that he uses to reas-
semble his forces for a later attack. In allowing himself a period of 
respite from his battles with France and his French identity, he is cast 
as able to establish himself as an academic and writer of some repute. 
Perhaps more importantly, he can also position himself very firmly as 
‘French’ in the eyes of his American colleagues and neighbours. In 
this, ‘Doubrovsky’’s escape to the US is represented as a direct result 
of the Occupation of France: ‘l’empire familial est détruit par 
l’invasion des barbares. Je suis parti rebâtir mon royaume en Améri-
que. Un jour, j’aurai mon appartement à Paris’ (UAS: 211). In Dou-
brovsky’s autofictional construction of selfhood, it seems that his nar-
rator never intends to renounce being French: he merely retreats to 
another space in which a play with the ubiquitous and elastic label of 
‘foreigner’ enables greater scope for self-definition. ‘Doubrovsky’’s

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
198 
academic and literary aspirations are quite clearly cast by his autofic-
tional authorial creator as being linked to a sense of displacement: 
 
Les lettres sont des lettres de noblesse. Une activité éthérée, certes, 
mais qui vous naturalise. Un juif, lui, n’écrit pas vraiment pour se fai-
re un nom: il s’agit de le refaire. Il s’appelle Bergson, mais on ne s’en 
aperçoit plus. S’ils devient suffisamment célèbre, le voilà enfin com-
me tout le monde. (LLB: 271) 
 
The strategy of spatial displacement and migration to the US, then, is 
presented as enabling ‘Doubrovsky’ to gain financial security, mate-
rial comfort and an academic reputation, thus realising some of his 
parents’ aspirations. It is clearly the transcendence of ethnico-racial 
barriers that literary acclaim would bring to which he really aspires, 
however. Indeed, ‘Doubrovsky’’s sense of Frenchness is not portrayed 
as rooted in cultural myths or shared cultural practices, but rather in 
French literature. The figures Doubrovsky’s narrator evokes as ‘truly’ 
French include writers such as Corneille, Racine and Proust, crowned 
by the figure of Jean-Paul Sartre. Sartre constitutes such a significant 
figure for ‘Doubrovsky’ that his own mother labels him her son’s 
‘père spirituel’. The significance of these French writers for ‘Dou-
brovsky’, has been extensively discussed by critics (Chard-Hutchinson 
1994; Miguet-Ollagnier 1992a; Miguet-Ollagnier 1992b; Robin 2000-
2001b; Saveau 1999: 28) and in Le Livre brisé, the narrator himself 
stresses the importance of Sartre, telling us: ‘ses bouquins m’ont 
éclairé à mesure, guidé comme des phares. Il n’a pas évité tous les 
écueils, qu’importe. Son itinéraire balise mon trajet’ (LLB: 72). Mar-
tine Chard-Hutchinson’s comment that Sartre represents a ‘point 
d’encrage et point d’ancrage’ (Chard-Hutchinson 1994: 164) for Dou-
brovsky’s narrator is particularly appropriate as ‘Doubrovsky’’s 
‘place’ will eventually be portrayed as found by following the cultural 
map drawn by Sartre and in aspiring to reach the heights of literary 
acclaim. Michael Worton and Judith Still argue in their (1993) book, 
Intertextuality: Theories and Practices, that the imitation, citation or 
plagiarism of pre-existing works of literature is a strategy that is often 
consciously adopted by writers in order to inscribe their work in ‘Tra-
dition’ (Worton and Still 1993: 12-13). This seems particularly rele-
vant in relation to Doubrovsky as the writers he cites as emblemati-
cally French are not merely well established figures of the French cul-
tural topography, but as both Régine Robin and Marie Miguet high-

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
199 
light, they also have specific links with Jewishness (Robin 2000-
2001b: 195-197; Miguet-Ollagnier 1992a: 76). Clearly, Doubrovsky 
wishes to imply that the destiny of his autofictional avatar is to find a 
place where he belongs within the literary elite of French society, in 
this way transcending the stigma and exclusion visited upon ‘ordi-
nary’ Jews. 
Being based in the US is certainly presented as allowing ‘Dou-
brovsky’ to escape from the anonymity he would feel in France. His 
involvement with New York’s maison française allows him to play a 
greater role in French literary circles than he would be able to in 
France itself. Doubrovsky’s narrator consciously highlights this irony, 
telling us that ‘il faut que j’aille à New York pour rencontrer, le temps 
d’une soirée, le Tout-Paris de l’intellect, le Who’s Who de la culture 
hexagonale, en France je sombre dans la masse épaisse, anonyme, 
perdu entre Trocadéro et bois de Boulogne’ (LPC: 39). Again, in a 
quest for ‘une place’, America is portrayed in a redemptive role, pro-
viding the opportunity for ‘Doubrovsky’ to establish himself within 
French literary circles. Despite his considerable literary and academic 
successes, in aspiring to join his ‘pères spirituels’ in the upper eche-
lons of French literature, ‘Doubrovsky’ is placed in a range of posi-
tions fausses. These are, once again, bound up with questions of spa-
tial, ethnic and national identity that weave further complexities into 
Doubrovsky’s autofictional construction of selfhood. For example, in 
Le Livre brisé, the serious effects of these positions fausses in terms of 
‘Doubrovsky’’s sense of identity are strongly highlighted: 
 
J’ai tellement de fausses positions que je ne peux plus m’y reconnaî-
tre. Un juif qui n’a jamais lu en entier la Bible, dont l’aliment favori 
est le porc. Un Français qui vit la moitié du temps en Amérique, pour 
y vanter, y vendre la France. En France, où j’écris, où je publie, je par-
le forcément de l’Amérique. […] Ma langue maternelle est le français. 
La langue que je parle avec mes filles, la paternelle, est l’anglais. Je 
rêve bilingue. (LLB: 58) 
 
Doubrovsky portrays his autofictional self as condemned to living in 
l’entre-deux, a phenomenon to which I will return later. Indeed, ‘Dou-
brovsky’ never does completely transcend the barriers of ethnicity and 
religion and, for example, never feels entitled to participate in debates 
about French politics:

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
200 
Me joindre aux bataillons de pétulants Zola, désolé, mon nom à cou-
cher dehors est tout petit, ma signature d’immigré par mon père 
d’Ukraine, par mon grand-père de Pologne, ne pèse pas lourd dans les 
éruptions franco-françaises. (LPC: 274) 
 
As an authorial subject, Serge Doubrovsky may, then, have achieved 
widespread literary and academic acclaim, his place within French lit-
erary circles being validated by invitations to such great French insti-
tutions as the literary television programme Apostrophes, but his auto-
fictional double, ‘Doubrovsky’, argues that he is never sufficiently ac-
cepted within French society to feel able to express his opinions on in-
ternal French politics. The sense of cultural belonging to be gained 
from literary achievement, then, seems to be incomplete and fragile. 
In the discussion of the spatial relations mapped out in Dou-
brovsky’s autofictions offered above I have demonstrated that, despite 
growing up in a clearly delimited, fixed location, rooted in social and 
physical space by stable family points of reference, Doubrovsky’s nar-
rator’s sense of belonging is represented as unsettled by the complexi-
ties of his own family and ethnic heritage and as undermined by the 
anti-Semitic ideological context of 1930s and 1940s France. The cul-
tural and social dispossession that he is portrayed as having experi-
enced during childhood, I have suggested, translates into the spatial 
displacements recorded in his account of his adulthood. These ac-
counts reveal ‘Doubrovsky’ to have built his life around a complex 
pattern of movements between the US and France. Seeking liberation 
from his ethnico-cultural dispossession through literary achievement, 
‘Doubrovsky’ is clearly presented as aspiring to ascend to the literary 
level of those such as Sartre and in this way to find a place in French 
society. Using the US as a base is shown to afford him various aca-
demic and material advantages, yet it also complicates his sense of 
self by putting him in a range of ‘positions fausses’. Whilst ‘Dou-
brovsky’’s constant fluctuations between the US and France remain in 
evidence throughout Doubrovsky’s autofictional oeuvre, these move-
ments are never suggested to have entirely reconciled ‘Doubrovsky’ 
with his own identity, or to have afforded him an unproblematic sense 
of belonging. Moreover, it seems that despite living in perpetual 
movement, a fear of confinement continues to pervade ‘Dou-
brovsky’’s life and his perception of space. This chapter will now seek 
to establish the nature of the dialectic of liberation and confinement

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
201 
that I have suggested underpins ‘Doubrovsky’’s search for ‘une 
place’. 
 
 
4.2 Liberation and Confinement: An Inescapable Dialectic 
 
The fear of confinement evident in the autofictions comprising Dou-
brovsky’s oeuvre can quite clearly be traced back to ‘Doubrovsky’’s 
experience of enforced hiding during the Nazi Occupation of France. 
As ‘Doubrovsky’ recalls, the fact that his adolescent self both looked 
stereotypically Jewish and was definitively marked by the Jewish 
practice of circumcision ensured that he was condemned to remain in 
hiding for nine months (LLB: 12; 19; 20). In Le Livre brisé, ‘Dou-
brovsky’ tells us: ‘consigne absolue: ne pas montrer le bout du nez. 
Surtout que je l’ai prononcé, proéminent. Crochu, ainsi qu’on disait 
dans les journaux’ (LLB: 15-16). As I argued above, the key role 
played by physical appearance in confining Doubrovsky’s textual ava-
tar within such a limited space is clear. In several places in his narra-
tions of the past, ‘Doubrovsky’ implies that he has never been entirely 
able to leave this experience behind, the scars and stigma of this time 
colouring his later life (F: 205; LPC: 238; LLB: 384). Moreover, I 
wish to contend that this experience of confinement is presented as 
having definitively altered ‘Doubrovsky’’s notion of home space. In 
particular, binary oppositions of good and bad home spaces and the 
notion of home as either safe-haven (LLB: 18; LPC: 62; F: 81) or con-
fining prison (UAS: 19; LLB: 21) remain particularly prevalent fea-
tures of ‘Doubrovsky’’s relationship with space. Even the family pro-
perty at le Vésinet, a location that I have argued to represent stability 
and continuity for ‘Doubrovsky’ seems to take on ambiguous proper-
ties after the war. The narrator of Fils, for example, refers to the solid-
ity of the walls and to the metal grills on the windows of this house: 
‘LA GRILLE c’est là à nous la nôtre on touche au port notre havre’ 
(F: 237). Features that would normally symbolise a prison, then, are 
presented by ‘Doubrovsky’ as emblems of his home space. 
The second confinement that ‘Doubrovsky’ is represented as 
undergoing during the first twenty-five years of his life is in a sanato-
rium. Diagnosed with ‘la tuberculose au testicule gauche’ (LLB: 32), 
he is condemned to two years’ convalescence. This time is depicted as 
one of extreme frustration for ‘Doubrovsky’, as he is forced to remain

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
202 
inactive, passing the time by memorising lists of English words. For 
the young ‘Doubrovsky’, with his desire to become sexually active, 
the most serious consequence of this illness is depicted as being its 
impact upon his sexual performance. Perhaps most threateningly, this 
illness also potentially ‘feminizes’ ‘Doubrovsky’’s body, as his treat-
ment involves being injected with female hormones (UAS: 33). 
Quite clearly, both of these periods of confinement can be seen 
to be linked to ‘Doubrovsky’’s physique, and both are, to a certain ex-
tent, the legacy of his father. It is ‘Doubrovsky’’s Jewish appearance, 
combined with his father’s choice of the name ‘Israël’, that is pre-
sented as inescapably marking him out as a target for Nazi persecu-
tion. As I argued before, whilst in hiding, ‘Doubrovsky’ recalls that 
his father added a further dimension to his confinement by continually 
exhorting him to do exercises and, implicitly, to fight the feared 
fleshy, unmasculine ‘Jewish’ body. Furthermore, it is tuberculosis, 
transmitted, it is implied, by his father, that confined him to two years’ 
bed rest and several more years of sexual difficulties. These two spe-
cific experiences of confinement can be seen to be related to ‘Dou-
brovsky’’s more general feeling of being ill at ease within his body, 
and of not really belonging to it. In Fils, Doubrovsky’s narrator tells 
us: 
 
jamais été comme les autres       à l’aise dans son corps       heureux 
dans sa peau      habitant paisible de sa tripe      normal de vivre      joie 
des muscles       inconnu néant. (F: 41) 
 
In relation to the pervasive theme of spatial confinement, then, we see 
again the complex intersections of ‘Doubrovsky’’s experience of 
space and his own body. The persecution to which ‘Doubrovsky’ was 
subjected by anti-Semites is portrayed as making him ill at ease with 
his own body, something that is exacerbated by his father, who at once 
controls and invades his son’s body. If a positive sense of belonging to 
the space of Paris is fundamentally associated with the maternal in 
Doubrovsky’s autofictions, then the sense of cultural dispossession 
can be seen to be at least partially linked with the paternal, a point to 
which I will return. 
If ‘Doubrovsky’ is represented as confined by his wartime ex-
periences, his health, and by his feeling of not belonging within his 
own body, then the key figure of liberation is predominantly repre-

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
203 
sented within Doubrovsky’s autofictional works by the US. It is the 
arrival of the Allied forces, embodied in the young ‘Doubrovsky’’s 
mind by the figure of an American soldier that allows him to leave his 
hiding place for the first time in nine months. In Fils, for example, 
‘Doubrovsky’ tells us: ‘Américains ils sont grands […] supériorité 
matérielle Libération aussi supériorité morale’ (F: 218-219). It is to 
the ‘New World’ that ‘Doubrovsky’ is presented as travelling after the 
war, and the ironic name of the boat on which he makes this trip does 
not escape the narrator of Laissé pour conte: ‘le Liberté, paquebot si 
bien nommé’ (LPC: 13). As I have already suggested, the US is pre-
sented as a place that liberates ‘Doubrovsky’ from persecution and al-
lows him to establish himself within academia (F: 124-126). Perhaps 
more crucially in relation to the dialectic of liberation and confine-
ment that I have identified within Doubrovsky’s autofictions, it is in 
the US that ‘Doubrovsky’ escapes the stigmatised conception of his 
Jewish body and finds himself to be perceived as sexually attractive 
for almost the first time. Indeed, ‘Doubrovsky’’s marriage to his 
American first wife, Claudia, leads him to establish the home that is 
portrayed as the most stable and unambiguous place of belonging of 
Doubrovsky’s whole autofictional œuvre (UAS: 212; F: 81 and 383; 
LPC: 137). The US is, then, a key figure of liberation for ‘Dou-
brovsky’, both in constituting the catalyst that releases him from his 
nine months in hiding, and in providing a space in which ‘Dou-
brovsky’ is released from the stigma and hunger of his confined body. 
If ‘Doubrovsky’’s relationships with home spaces are ambigu-
ous, and the US is portrayed in a liberating role, then the role of 
women within the dialectic of liberation and confinement must also be 
examined. As I have already briefly argued, ‘Doubrovsky’’s first wife 
Claudia, and the establishment of the marital home of Queens, which 
allowed ‘Doubrovsky’ to feel rooted again for the first time since be-
fore the war, were clearly liberating for him. ‘Doubrovsky’’s subse-
quent girlfriend Rachel, who features prominently in Un Amour de 
soi, however, is portrayed in an entirely different light (UAS: 201; 
159; 160; 173). Even before she convinces ‘Doubrovsky’ to leave 
Queens and move in with her, Rachel’s flat is described as prison-like 
despite not having metal grills on the windows like those of her 
neighbours. ‘Doubrovsky’ narrates his first visit to her flat, commen-
ting upon ‘le vestibule étroit, obscur’ with its ‘boîtes à lettres fermés à 
clef, la grille de l’interphone,’ and ‘la cage de l’escalier s’étrangle

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
204 
comme un puits à pic’ (UAS: 19). This depiction of oppressive and 
dangerous space comes to characterise Rachel herself once they live 
together: ‘elle me déprime, m’opprime. Ses grands yeux noirs enjô-
leurs sont une geôle’ (UAS: 162). Moreover, in a direct reference to 
his wartime experiences, ‘Doubrovsky’ indicates that Rachel restricts 
his spatial freedom: 
 
pour circuler, je dois demander l’autorisation. Un Ausweis, comme 
pendant la guerre, laissez-passer. Sinon, elle me colle au Poteau 
d’exécution d’une crise de nerfs. Je suis condamné à la fusillade à 
bout portant, lettre après lettre. Douze engueulades dans la peau. 
(UAS: 157) 
 
Whilst Doubrovsky certainly portrays his autofictional double’s iden-
tity as being threatened by Rachel as she tries to restrict and confine 
him, ‘Doubrovsky’’s relationship with her and the space she repre-
sents is far from unambiguous. He is, for example, highly dependent 
upon her, describing her as ‘nourricière, nutritive, qu’elle me remplis-
se […] qu’elle m’adore à la place de ma mère, à la place où j’ai pas eu 
de mère, à la place eu j’ai pas eu de place, qu’elle me bouche mes in-
terstices…’ (UAS: 261). When Rachel’s behaviour becomes too op-
pressive for ‘Doubrovsky’, far from seeking independence, he instead 
seeks liberation with another woman. Carol, with whom he goes to 
Dieppe, is portrayed as both liberated and liberating, making love by 
an open window looking out onto the sea, and demanding little in the 
way of commitments. ‘Doubrovsky’ indicates that without his brief re-
lationship with Carol, he would not have been able to stay with Rachel 
for so long: ‘Carol m’a débouché l’horizon, débondé l’outre des vents, 
ouvert son ventre goguenard, entre ses cuisses étalées fuse le rire’ 
(UAS: 162). Whilst life with Rachel is compared to Nazi levels of 
spatial restriction, Carol liberates him spatially and physically. If his 
relationships with women sometimes restrict and confine him, then 
they are also depicted as being essential in liberating ‘Doubrovsky’. 
In discussing ‘Doubrovsky’’s relationship with women in rela-
tion to home spaces and spaces of belonging, it is interesting to exam-
ine his depiction of water. Just as women are portrayed as essential, if 
sometimes imprisoning, factors within ‘Doubrovsky’’s relationship 
with space, then water is similarly significant. Drawing upon the sym-
bolic links of what he terms ‘l’irrémédiable féminité de l’eau’ (F: 
424), ‘Doubrovsky’ himself consciously highlights the importance of

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
205 
both water and the mother figure in his relationship with space.9 In Le 
Livre brisé, for example, we are told: 
 
de mer en mer d’une rive à l’autre de l’océan  suis un animal aquati-
que   peux exister qu’imprégné de sucs femelles sinon je suffoque   
sans ma ration d’émois moites j’étouffe   si je ne baigne pas dans du 
féminin    comme un poisson à sec sur la sable je crève  (LLB: 394) 
 
‘Doubrovsky’ repeatedly travels from one side of the Atlantic to the 
other in his search both for liberation from his mother and for a place 
of belonging of his own. Whilst portrayed as a barrier that he places 
between his two halves (F: 355; LLB: 194 and 206), the water that di-
vides him is also his home and he is condemned to living in the ‘entre-
deux’ of the Atlantic (F: 333). In many ways, water may be said to be 
the irremediably female life source essential to his survival and his 
sense of belonging. If the River Seine in Paris is depicted as the place 
of origin of ‘Doubrovsky’’s life journey, then the gentle flow of this 
‘écoulement berceur, qui nous désancre’ (F: 190) is an ambiguous 
home. It continually pushes away and expels that which is within it, 
just as maternal fluids ease the child out of its home in the mother’s 
body. Forming a relationship with a woman allows ‘Doubrovsky’ to 
feel that he has again anchored himself within the mobile female sea 
that surrounds him, stabilising his identity. For ‘Doubrovsky’, being 
part of a couple allows him to ‘rentre[r] au port, un port d’attache un 
havre de paix’ (AV: 214), in the unsettled world in which he lives. 
In what precedes, I have sought to show how the perpetual 
search for ‘une place’ that marks ‘Doubrovsky’’s relationship with 
space is underpinned by a dialectic of liberation and confinement. My 
argument will now turn to an important aspect of ‘Doubrovsky’’s spa-
tial identity that I alluded to above, that of the divisions in his life and 
his identity. In this, I will propose that the continual geographical dis-
placements and division between two home spaces that characterise 
this autofictional construction of selfhood represent a fundamental, 
psychological division in ‘Doubrovsky’’s identity. To what extent, 
                                                 
9 
This is a theme developed in Bachelard’s (1974) La Poétique de 
l’espace.

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
206 
then, are ‘Doubrovsky’’s divisions cast as conscious, and what role 
are they depicted as playing in his life? 
 
 
4.3 Divided Identity in Divided Spaces 
 
As established above, Doubrovsky’s narrator’s adult life remains en-
duringly divided between the US and France. The existence of a divi-
sion in ‘Doubrovsky’’s life is something of which ‘Doubrovsky’’s 
narrator is very aware and which has a direct parallel in the life of 
Doubrovsky the author. In an interview with Alex Hughes, Dou-
brovsky attributes this division to his Jewishness stating that ‘c’est 
mon ultime fracture. Nous avons déjà abordé le fait que tout, chez moi 
est scission. La dernière opposition binaire naît de mes rapports avec 
la judéité’ (Doubrovsky in interview with Hughes 1999). Critic Régi-
ne Robin endorses a similar argument in relation to ‘Doubrovsky’ the 
narrator, writing that ‘le rapport à la judéité, c’est en termes de coupu-
re, de blessure qu’il faut le saisir’. She goes on to argue that Dou-
brovsky’s narrator is mired in ‘la coupure, la brisure, la fêlure, la fis-
sure’ and lives in ‘deux lieux qui ne constituent pas pour autant une 
place’ (Robin 2000-2001b : 195-197). Some aspects of Doubrovsky’s 
autofictional oeuvre would seem to suggest that this division is delib-
erately constructed by his autofictional counterpart as, for example, 
the narrator tells us in Un Amour de soi that ‘côté cour et côté jardin, 
j’ai mes deux vies. Mes deux villes, Paris-New York, maintenant 
Manhattan-Queens. Maintenir mes moitiés séparées, mon système est 
strict […] Pas d’interférence entre mes schizes’ (UAS: 252). The sys-
tem to which ‘Doubrovsky’ refers as he invokes his divided identity is 
known as ‘le système S.D.’ (AV: 29), and he explains it at length: 
 
J’ai construit mon va-et-vient depuis plus d’un quart de siècle. J’y 
tiens, il me tient. Divisé par le milieu, en dédoublant ma vie, il la re-
double. Deux appartements, deux langues, deux cultures, deux pays, 
deux peaux, un an sur deux. (AV: 29) 
 
This system attempts to reconcile, or at least to explain, a life lived be-
tween two cultures and two languages, as well as frequently two home 
environments. As a young man ‘Doubrovsky’ is torn between the need 
to establish a new life in the US that offers cultural, academic and per-
sonal opportunities, and the sorrow of leaving his mother in France,

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
207 
but the negative effects of this division become more prevalent as he 
gets older. For example, he is presented as increasingly perceiving his 
two halves as irreconcilable rather than complementary: ‘moi, zig-
zaguant entre mes Paris-New York, des mondes séparés, hostiles, en 
guerre’ (LPC: 187). More specifically, in Le Livre brisé ‘Doubrovsky’ 
reports Ilse’s complaints over the negative effect of his lifestyle on her 
own attempts to find work, and he even attributes part of the blame for 
her sudden death to their geographical separation (LLB: 376). We are 
told: ‘vertige des voyages zigzags d’errances mes hésitations géogra-
phiques mes indécisions planétaires mon éternelle bourlingue M’AS-
SASSINE (LLB: 394). As ‘Doubrovsky’ becomes increasingly de-
pendent upon his daughters in his old age, he realises that ‘mes filles 
veulent leur père. Je le leur dois. J’ai été, avec mes voyages en zig-
zags, dans leur enfance, un père à éclipses’ (AV: 29). He comes to re-
gret the cultural gap between him and Renée, saying ‘tout est dit, moi 
en français, elle en anglais, […] on n’est pas séparés par Manhattan-
Queens, mais par l’Atlantique, on partage le même amour mais pas la 
même langue’ (LPC: 350; AV: 34).10 Perhaps most seriously of all, 
‘Doubrovsky’ worries that ‘quand je prendrai ma retraite, je suis 
condamné à les perdre. De vue, pas question de me fixer ailleurs qu’à 
Paris. Je les verrai aux vacances et de vacances, en Amérique, on a 
quinze jours’ (AV: 35). Having built his life around two separate cul-
tures and two distinct spaces, ‘Doubrovsky’ is condemned to living 
without some of the most important people in his life for significant 
amounts of time. 
The système S.D. involves, then, a division based on loss. The 
geographical displacements that are presented as having been moti-
vated originally by the cultural and social displacements of his early 
life, do free ‘Doubrovsky’ to establish his career and do afford him 
greater independence from his mother than would otherwise be possi-
ble, but they also engender considerable damage to his close relation-
ships. I have suggested that the impact of this is presented as felt more 
                                                 
10 
Intratextually, we are told that ‘Doubrovsky’ also regrets the fact that Renée 
will never read the books that he writes (AV: 37). Annie Jouan-Westlund, 
however, argues that in fact Doubrovsky does not wish his daughters to read 
his work, perhaps because of the harsh revelations about Doubrovsky that can 
be found in his writing.

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
208 
acutely in older age. In accepting ‘France Amérique, [son] destin dou-
ble, à jamais scindé en deux’ (LPC: 52), Doubrovsky’s autofictional 
narrator accepts a life constantly located in the entre-deux. As he re-
marks in Le Livre brisé: ‘ça me déforme. Un pied de chaque côté de 
l’Atlantique, parfois je nage. Il m’arrive de perdre pied’ (LLB: 59). In 
living in both France and the US, he is narratively cast as decisively 
rooted in neither and therefore always operates in a state of lack. 
 
 
Lacanian Geographies and Divisions 
 
That the système S.D. and the spatial and cultural duality that it entails 
is significant for ‘Doubrovsky’ on a psychological level is acknowl-
edged both by critics and by ‘Doubrovsky’ himself. Critic Hélène Jac-
comard, highlighting the importance of the psychological in the work 
of Doubrovsky, has suggested that ‘c’est à un voyage dans les méan-
dres de l’inconscient que nous sommes conviés’ (Jaccomard 1993: 
85). ‘Doubrovsky’ himself tells us in L’Après-vivre that: 
 
Il faut toujours qu’une moitié de moi me manque […]. Vingt ans j’ai 
été Julien, depuis quarante ans, je m’appelle Serge. Mes deux prénoms 
me divisent par une frontière invisible, insurmontable. Je l’ai repro-
duite partout, je l’ai étendue à tous les domaines. Pourquoi j’ai inventé 
ce système qui me fend la vie, le cœur, par le milieu. […] J’ai tenté de 
m’en expliquer, de me l’expliquer, il y a longtemps, dans d’autres li-
vres. Avec Fils, chez mon analyste. Naturellement on découvre mon 
oedipe. (AV: 30) 
 
Doubrovsky’s narrator’s explanation of his division centres, not uni-
ronically, around the notion of the Oedipal conflict, suggesting that in 
order for ‘Doubrovsky’ to become an independent individual capable 
of forming adult relationships with women, it is necessary for him to 
extricate himself from an excessively interdependent relationship with 
his mother. This psychological separation is presented as perceived by 
‘Doubrovsky’ to necessitate a spatial separation, and he argues that it 
is necessary for him to put geographical distance between the two of 
them in the form of the Atlantic Ocean (AV: 30). This phenomenon 
has been addressed by psychoanalyst and critic Jean-François Chian-
taretto, who argues that

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
209 
la prise de distance géographique sera auto-interpretée par le narra-
teur-analysant comme un acte symbolique […], un acte qui compense-
rait partiellement une défaillance des processus de symbolisation, sans 
prendre au plan psychique la valeur d’un opérateur symbolique. Ga-
gner sa vie aux Etats-Unis consiste à «coexister», [...] il ne s’agit pas 
d’une union séparation engageant la symbolisation de l’absence, mais 
d’une séparation où il manque toujours une moitié. (Chiantaretto 
1993: 169-170) 
 
This chapter will now move on to argue that a parallel can be drawn 
between ‘Doubrovsky’’s construction of divided geographies in which 
to live his life and the internal or psychological divisions that so fun-
damentally mark his identity. The phenomenon will be presented 
through a reading fuelled by Lacanian theory, which will focus par-
ticularly upon Lacan’s theorisation of the ‘imaginary’ and the ‘sym-
bolic’ stages of subjectivity development. Whilst attempting to psy-
choanalyse a (semi)-fictional character is clearly not entirely unprob-
lematic, in ‘Doubrovsky’’s case, some justifications can be found. As 
has already been indicated, the author himself has stressed his desire 
for these autofictional texts to constitute a continuation of his own ex-
tratextual psychoanalysis, a goal that he seeks to achieve through his 
free-flowing, ‘consonantal’ writing style. The intratextual self to be 
found in these works, then, may not be a living entity with a genuine 
psyche of his own, but he is very clearly a psychic projection of Dou-
brovsky himself. In the textual ‘Doubrovsky’ that we find in these 
works, then, the author is seeking to establish and construct a ‘truth’ 
or ‘truths’ of his own selfhood. Bearing this in mind, it seems far from 
unreasonable to engender a dialogue between the vagaries of ‘Dou-
brovsky’’s textual identity and psychoanalytic theory.11 
The psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan has been credited with mak-
ing a crucial contribution to contemporary thinking on subjectivity 
and its constructions: a contribution whose resonances have penetrated 
epistemological fields outside the psychological domain proper. In 
particular, his development of Freud’s psychoanalytic paradigms has 
encouraged a dialogue between poststructuralist thinking and psycho-
analysis, which has enabled psychoanalytic theory to adopt a more ho-
                                                 
11 
For further discussions of the merits and potential pitfalls of psychoanalysing 
literary characters, see Wright (1984).

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
210 
listic approach to the interactions and interdependencies of the indi-
vidual in society (Sarup 1988: chapter 1). On initial inspection, there 
are a number of areas of particular compatibility between Lacanian 
thinking and the work of Serge Doubrovsky. Both are clearly con-
cerned, for example, with exploring the interdependencies of corpore-
ality, visuality and language in identity formation. Like Freud, for in-
stance, Lacan sees language as the site of the truth of subjectivity 
(Vergole 1970: XX), the unconscious being accessed through the 
analysis of dreams, word play, slips of the tongue, puns and jokes 
(Lemaire 1970: 43). Similarly, as discussed in chapter 2, Doubrovsky 
employs a ‘consonantal’ writing style which, as Patrick Saveau ar-
gues, is ‘writing based on alliteration, assonance, homonyms, paro-
nyms, antonyms, anagrams [resulting in] the poetic meanderings of 
language let loose’ (Saveau 1999: 27). Doubrovsky’s writing does, 
then, rely on just this type of creative word play, as well as dream 
analysis in order to construct the real ‘truth’ of his autofictional self-
hood. Perhaps most crucial is the status of the mother in relation to 
identity: Lacan sees overdependency on the mother and lack of sepa-
ration from her as damaging and as potentially resulting in psychosis, 
whilst ‘Doubrovsky’’s construction of selfhood in Fils, seems to be 
battling with precisely this problem. Indeed, using his narrator ‘Dou-
brovsky’’s lengthy psychoanalysis as a significant motor for Fils, 
Doubrovsky’s extensive critical engagement with psychoanalytic the-
ory is clear. 
Having very briefly delineated some points of convergence be-
tween Doubrovsky’s writing and Lacanian theory, I will now re-
examine ‘Doubrovsky’’s split spatial identity, in particular his rela-
tionships with France and the US, in the light of Lacan’s theorisation 
of the various arenas of identity formation, particularly the imaginary 
and the symbolic.12 
The Lacanian exegete Anika Lemaire explains that 
 
Lacan defines the essence of the imaginary as a dual relationship, a 
reduplication in the mirror, an immediate opposition between con-
sciousness and its other in which each term becomes its opposite and 
                                                 
12 
A particularly helpful discussion of notions of the imaginary and symbolic is 
to be found in Wright (1984).

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
211 
is lost in the play of the reflections. In its quest for itself, conscious-
ness thus believes that it has found itself in the mirror of its creatures 
and loses itself in something which is not consciousness. (Lemaire 
1970: 60) 
 
In the pre-linguistic stage to which this citation refers, without access 
to the tools of language that permit the differentiation of self from 
Other and of self from environment, the ‘subject’ functions in a state 
of interdependency, normally with its mother. In this moment, indi-
vidual identity formation occurs, but it is a false identity that is cast 
upon the subject from outside. The existence of this type of subjectiv-
ity can, I wish to argue, be detected within Doubrovsky’s autofictional 
construction of selfhood. As I have already proposed, in the early 
stages of ‘Doubrovsky’’s identity construction, particularly during his 
childhood and adolescence in Paris, Doubrovsky’s autofictional dou-
ble, to judge by his recollections, is very definitely dominated by his 
mother, seeming to be the subject of a highly interdependent relation-
ship with her (F: 230-233). This psychological state seems to play a 
clear role in the identity formation of Doubrovsky’s autofictionally 
rendered self. Indeed, he is portrayed as feeling that his life’s mission 
is to become that which his mother never could, and in this way to live 
in her place. For example, even at such an early stage as deciding on a 
name, ‘Doubrovsky’’s mother is depicted as already hoping that he 
would become a writer, and thus perpetuate her family’s love of litera-
ture and theatre. In reference to this ‘Doubrovsky’ tells us: ‘elle dit. 
J’ai raté ma vocation. J’écrirai donc. À sa place’ (F: 253). ‘Doubrovs-
ky’ feels that he is ‘CHARGÉ D’EXISTER À SA PLACE’ and that 
 
tout ce qu’elle n’a PAS PU. JE POURRAI. Forcément, se joue à deux. 
Je suis personne. Tu seras quelqu’un. À ma place. C’est la règle. Notre 
pacte. On sera UN-EN-DEUX. Deux corps, un cœur. Le même être. 
(F: 230) 
 
A link can be established between this idea of ‘UN-EN-DEUX’ 
mooted here in relation to ‘Doubrovsky’’s identity, and Lacan’s no-
tion of the initial mirror stage. This phase is not seen as providing the 
child with individuated subjectivity because ‘in the other, in the mir-
ror’s image, in his mother, the child sees nothing but a fellow with 
whom he merges, with whom he identifies’ (Lemaire 1970: 78). Dou-
brovsky does quite clearly cast his autofictional self as merging with 
his mother, both in terms of his aspirations and his identity. Lacan

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
212 
suggests that at this stage the unmediated subject will seek to become 
the object of the other’s desire and in this way indispensable. In be-
coming a writer, ‘Doubrovsky’ is attempting to fulfil his mother’s fan-
tasy (LLB: 270). 
Furthermore, Lemaire tells us that during the mirror phase as it 
is theorised in the Lacanian psychoanalytic model 
 
the subject is his own double more than he is himself […]. The whole 
drama of the dual relationship is played out here: consciousness col-
lapses into its double without keeping its distance from it. There is an 
immediate opposition in which each term becomes its opposite. (Le-
maire 1970: 81) 
 
Again, clear examples of the development of a contradictory desire to 
both occupy his mother’s place whilst also being different from her 
are evident in ‘Doubrovsky’’s narration of selfhood. In Fils, he tells us 
‘je veux être LE CONTRAIRE D’ELLE’ (F: 251) and he specifies 
that he wishes neither to make the level of self-sacrifice that his 
mother does, nor live always in the same place without doing any sig-
nificant travelling as she has done. Far from becoming an independent 
individual, then, ‘Doubrovsky’’s identity seems to be highly interde-
pendent with that of his mother, as he seeks to become either the ob-
ject of her desire or her exact opposite. 
Drawing upon the argument offered above, the notion that Dou-
brovsky’s narrator is entrapped in a mirror-relationship of unmediated 
dependency can be extended to encompass not only ‘Doubrovsky’’s 
mother, but also his pays matrie. France is depicted as the environ-
ment in which ‘Doubrovsky’ originally establishes himself as a sub-
ject, and in which he formulates his aspirations, goals and values. As 
argued earlier, the link between the maternal and ‘Doubrovsky’’s geo-
graphical and cultural sense of belonging, i.e. between ‘Dou-
brovsky’’s mère and his mère-patrie, is both clear and conscious. 
‘Doubrovsky’’s sense of belonging to France is presented as rooted in 
his mother: it is her memories that root him to the space of the Tro-
cadéro, for example, and it is the family rituals of familiar meals and 
customs that provide his sense of home. Perhaps more importantly, 
my argument that ‘Doubrovsky’ must leave France and move to the 
US in order to establish his academic career and own family can be 
seen to play a role within the narrator’s need to separate himself from 
his mother in order to achieve independence and achieve the transition

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
213 
from the imaginary, dependent stage to the independent, ‘symbolic’ 
stage. Clearly fusing both these themes, ‘Doubrovsky’ states in L’Ap-
rès-vivre: ‘mais moi, ce que j’aime, ma mère, ma mère patrie, il faut 
tôt où tard que je le quitte’ (AV: 146). ‘Doubrovsky’’s construction of 
a complex web of spatial movements through which to live his life, 
may, then, be far from merely a result of the development of a particu-
lar identity, but may actually be presented as playing an active, causal 
role within the most fundamental aspects of his psychological devel-
opment. 
If ‘Doubrovsky’ must leave France, his pays mère, and his 
mother herself in order to develop as an individual, what can be said 
to be the role played by the US, in ‘Doubrovsky’’s identity formations 
as they are adumbrated across Doubrovsky’s self-metamorphic auto-
fictional corpus? 
If Lacan’s Imaginary can be said to be paralleled by ‘Dou-
brovsky’’s relationship with France, and if it seems that he must leave 
this country in order to enter the next stage of identity development, 
then perhaps the US itself can be equated with the Symbolic stage in 
Doubrovsky’s autofictional geography? If as Lacanian theory sug-
gests, accession to the Symbolic depends upon developing the tools 
through which to recognise individual autonomy and to distance the 
self from the immediacy of lived experience, then this is certainly the 
role that the US is cast as playing in ‘Doubrovsky’’s life. As I have al-
ready argued, ‘Doubrovsky’’s migration to the US is presented as 
partly motivated by the need to escape his mother, and in this way to 
escape the UN-EN-DEUX enough to form relationships with other 
women. Similarly, it is the US that provides him with the opportunity 
to re-negotiate the identity cast upon him by the exclusionary dis-
courses operating in the France of his youth and to see himself as a 
valuable human being, as well as the chance to acquire financial inde-
pendence, status and academic success (AV: 31; UAS: 211; LPC: 39). 
The US is, then, a place of enlightenment and individual development 
for ‘Doubrovsky’. Perhaps most significantly, it is in the US that he is 
portrayed as undergoing his lengthy analysis, the initial aim of which 
is to free himself from his mother after her death, both in order to be 
able to form relationships with other women and to recover suffi-
ciently from his grief in order to function normally. If such an argu-
ment is, then, sustainable, and the US is depicted as an environment in 
which Doubrovsky’s narrator can separate from his over-dependency

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
214 
on both his mother and his mère patrie, why is it that ‘Doubrovsky’’s 
autofictional self continues to be plagued by division in so many as-
pects of his life? 
Lacan argues that the accession to the symbolic order effects the 
spaltung, or splitting, of the subject because in mediating oneself in 
discourse, the immediate relation of self to self is destroyed. ‘Truth’ 
will in this way be lost from consciousness and an unconscious estab-
lished. Indeed, the symbolic must always be based on lack as 
 
The impossible coincidence of the (I), the subject of the enunciation, 
with the ‘I’, the subject of the utterance, begins the dialectic of the 
subject’s alienations. The subject becomes set in his utterances and 
social roles, and their totality is alienation which makes him construct 
his ego as another and for another. (Lemaire 1970: 72) 
 
A parallel can again be drawn with ‘Doubrovsky’’s relationship with 
space. If the symbolic stage introduces the subject to a subjectivity 
that is marked by division, as the unmediated imaginary still exists 
simultaneously in the form of the unconscious, then this subjectivity is 
manifest in the dual existence of homes in both the US and France in 
‘Doubrovsky’’s adulthood. Despite living primarily in the US and 
forging himself a successful career in this country, ‘Doubrovsky’’s 
conflictual allegiance to his ‘true’ homeland, France, remains an im-
portant part of his identity (AV: 31). 
Furthermore, discussing Lacan’s work, Lemaire argues that the 
psychoanalytic cure represents a return to the imaginary, to the ‘truth’ 
that has been forgotten: 
 
The cure is the transition from the non-symbolized imaginary to the 
symbolized imaginary. It is, in other words, the access to the truth of 
the patient’s personal code. Restored to its essential status of a sym-
bol, the symbolized imaginary stands opposed to the alienating imagi-
nary. (Lemaire 1970: 74) 
 
Therefore, whilst for ‘Doubrovsky’, psychoanalysis helps him to come 
to terms with the death of his mother, which, as I have argued above, 
he often links with the death of his mère patrie, it certainly does not 
convince him that the US is the space in which an unproblematic 
home can now be found. In Fils, for example, he tells us:

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
215 
PARIS EST MORT ma mère ma France la France disparue père russe 
moi j’ai jamais eu de patrie qu’une matrie un amatride désert d’er-
rances l’Amérique n’est pas mon pays mon lieu c’est OÙ. (F: 332) 
 
Psychoanalysis allows ‘Doubrovsky’, he reveals, to construct a story 
of his past with which he can live, freeing him from the excessively 
interdependent relationship with his mother, and from the experiences 
that he underwent in his mère patrie. Just as it is a return to the truth 
of the unconscious that is sought in psychoanalysis, so ‘Doubrovsky’ 
seeks a return to his pays matrie and the establishment of his identity 
as ‘French’ in his relationship with space. 
Despite his ‘cure’, however, the identity of Doubrovsky’s auto-
fictional double remains in many ways divided and lacking. As Chian-
taretto argues in the citation invoked at the beginning of this section, 
this separation is never about complete loss or complete possession, 
but an in-between, entre-deux. Doubrovsky’s writings convey the fact 
that his autofictional self never entirely belongs either to France or to 
the US, and never really feels part of a group. ‘Doubrovsky’ locates 
himself very firmly in a state of in-betweenness. Referring to his 
mother, he says ‘mon pacte: serai comme Maman. Mon serment: serai 
jamais comme elle. Entre les deux. Dans l’entredeux….’ (F: 255). Si-
milarly, writing about his location in space, he depicts himself as ‘[un] 
bateau ivre entre la France et l’Amérique navigue sans amarre démâté 
désemparé sans port d’attache’ (F: 333). If the ‘imaginary’ could be 
said to be paralleled by France and the ‘symbolic’ by the US, then 
what can be said of this entre-deux state? Perhaps most reasonably, 
the in-betweenness that is the cipher of the identity of Doubrovsky’s 
autofictional avatar could be said to constitute the return to the Imagi-
nary that a psychoanalytic cure is said to represent. In this case, l’en-
tre-deux represents a state in which the patient is able to access the in-
ner ‘truth’ of his unconscious whilst remaining within the symbolised 
universe. It is the space of the US that affords ‘Doubrovsky’ the 
means and opportunity to effect this re-entry into the Imaginary, and 
as such he is unable ever to entirely leave this country behind, never 
fully establishing himself within one country or one culture. 
Finally, it is productive to link this analysis of Doubrovsky’s 
autofictional construction of identity with one of the most fundamen-
tal aspects of Lacanian theory: the role of language in identity forma-
tion. In ‘Le Séminaire sur «La Lettre volée»’ (1966: 19-75), Lacan

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
216 
stresses the importance of the accession to language in the child’s de-
velopment. As I have outlined above, accession to language, constitut-
ing the substitution of a symbol for a thing or an idea, ends the imme-
diate, direct relationship of very young children with their surround-
ings. The accession to language, furthermore, is argued by Lacan also 
to represent the child’s accession to the Symbolic Order, as the pre-
existing structure of rules that language represents initiates the subject 
into social and kinship relations (Vergole 1970: XVIII). Language is 
crucial, then, for the recognition of a subject’s autonomy, for the de-
velopment of the subject’s awareness of its role as a member of soci-
ety, and for the necessary transition to occur from the unmediated, 
pre-linguistic stage of the ‘Imaginary’ to the mediated, independent 
subject position of the Symbolic. Perhaps most crucially, Lacan high-
lights the way in which everything is registered in the unconscious 
through language (Vergole 1970: XVIII). In the case of ‘Doubrovsky’, 
however, his relationship with his ‘langue maternelle’ is far from sim-
ple, being inherently linked with the questions of cultural, ethnic and 
national belonging that plague his narration of selfhood as discussed 
earlier in this chapter. If a person’s identity is mediated and even re-
fracted through the prism of language into the subject’s unconscious, 
then perhaps this may explain the ongoing and irreconcilable division 
within ‘Doubrovsky’’s identity. Clearly feeling that French is his 
‘langue maternelle’, ‘Doubrovsky’ is, however denied the identity of 
‘French’ by the society around him. This externally enforced distanc-
ing from his mother tongue may, then, indicate the inscription of 
alienation within his unconscious, perhaps going some way to explain-
ing the irreconcilable sense of exclusion that pervades Doubrovsky’s 
work. Similarly linked with the desire to escape the identity cast upon 
him from outside is the desire to reappropriate this emblem of French-
ness through achieving literary acclaim and mastery of the French 
language. 
This section has suggested that light can be shed on Dou-
brovsky’s articulation of ‘Doubrovsky’’s divisions through the appli-
cation of Lacanian theory. In particular, it has proposed that ‘Dou-
brovsky’’s two principal home spaces, France and the US, play key 
roles in his negotiations of the imaginary and the symbolic stages of 
subject formation as elaborated in the Lacanian model. If both of these 
spaces can be said to constitute symbols of ‘Doubrovsky’’s arenas of 
development, then I have also argued that his spatial movements act as

Doubrovsky: Autofictional Constructions of Self and Place 
217 
a strategy allowing alternative identity formations. In particular, whilst 
‘Doubrovsky’ is able through his transition to the US and the psycho-
analysis that he undertakes in this country to effect a return to the 
Imaginary and an examination of his ‘inner truth’, he remains divided 
between the imaginary and symbolic stages just as he is destined to 
remain divided between France and the US. 
The autofictional writings of Serge Doubrovsky, in sum, pre-
sent a vision of subjectivity in which home space and cultural belong-
ing are of prime importance. Clearly indicating Paris to be the space 
with which he feels the greatest affiliation, ‘Doubrovsky’’s sense of 
cultural belonging is deeply unsettled by the anti-Semitic discourses 
of the mid-twentieth century, and he is presented as becoming irreme-
diably torn between France and the US. Despite living in perpetual 
movement ‘Doubrovsky’ is presented as remaining plagued by a com-
plex fear of confinement and a recurring desire to be liberated. The 
Lacanian reading that I have undertaken demonstrates the extent to 
which geo-cultural division is portrayed as deeply interwoven in 
‘Doubrovsky’’s very psyche.

5. 
Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving  
Home Spaces 
 
 
Régine Robin’s literary oeuvre, which comprises a novel entitled La 
Québécoite, a book of short stories, L’Immense Fatigue des pierres, 
and an autobiographical Internet project, Papiers perdus, is clearly 
more diverse in generic terms than the works of either Serge Dou-
brovsky or Hervé Guibert. Indeed, as I argued in chapter 2, Robin’s 
writings seem to move restlessly between a range of literary genres 
and textual forms. Despite the evidently problematic nature of any at-
tempt to suggest that Robin’s three pieces of literary writing could be 
treated as undifferentiated parts of a whole, it will be central to my ar-
gument here to identify commonalities between them. In fact, as I sug-
gested in my introductory discussion in chapter 2, despite their differ-
ences in generic and textual form, there is considerable overlap be-
tween these texts’ primary concerns. In particular, a formative role is 
played in each by the author’s will to create a literary inscription of 
the complexities of her own identity. Each text explores, to some ex-
tent and in some way, what it is to be a Franco-Jewish academic 
whose subjectivity and life experience have been unsettled by the 
decimation of her ethnic and cultural heritage, as well as by the 
slaughter of fifty-one members of her family in the Second World 
War. The complex nature of Robin’s life writing project is deepened 
by her belief that the extreme events of the Holocaust have under-
mined any possibility of realist representation, and that only a frag-
mented, provisional and plural fiction is capable of representing the 
atrocities that occurred. Despite her rejection of any simply self-
referential, realist narrative, each of Robin’s literary writings can, 
then, be considered to constitute a particularly innovative form of life 
writing, and all three can loosely be said to comprise an autobio-
graphical corpus for Robin. In treating all three texts in the same dis-
cussion, I shall not be seeking to elide the differences between these 
diverse works, but rather will seek to highlight continuities and shared

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
220 
traits, with the aim of paving the way to drawing some conclusions 
about Robin’s overall writerly project in chapter 6. 
Throughout these works1, space plays an important role. In 
many ways there are parallels between the constructions of home 
space in Robin’s writings and those of Doubrovsky’s autofictions. Ex-
pressing a feeling of disorientation and lack of a clear home space, for 
example, the various voices of Robin’s works seem repeatedly to tell 
us of their feeling of a lack of spatial belonging. In La Québécoite, the 
main characters of both the first and third of the three parallel scenar-
ios express a sense of rootlessness. We are told, for example, ‘je suis 
autre. Je n’appartiens pas à ce Nous si fréquemment utilisé ici. […] Je 
ne suis pas d’ici’ (Q: 54) and later ‘ici ou ailleurs, je n’ai jamais été 
chez moi’ (Q: 178). In Robin’s collection of short stories, L’Immense 
Fatigue des pierres, the different narrators seem to express similar 
sentiments, telling us that ‘j’habite l’exclusion depuis si longtemps’ 
(IFP, ‘L’Immense Fatigue’: 33) and ‘je me perds, me dissipe, m’épar-
pille’ (IFP, ‘Journal’: 142). Perhaps most interestingly, and also in 
symmetry with the work of Doubrovsky, this lack of feeling of be-
longing is often associated with Jewishness. In La Québécoite, for 
example, one protagonist asserts that ‘depuis toujours nous sommes 
des errants. Immerrants. Immergés. Immer toujours. Himmel le ciel. 
La perte du nom, de la mère et du lieu. Sans feu, ni lieu…’ (Q: 63). 
                                                 
1 
This chapter will focus on La Québécoite (Montreal: Typo, 1983) which I will 
refer to as ‘Q’; L’Immense Fatigue des pierres (Montreal: XYZ, 1999) which 
I will refer to as ‘IFP’, and the internet home page Papiers perdus, http:// 
www.er.uqam.ca/nobel/r24136/bio.html which I will refer to as ‘PP’. When 
referring to particular examples within L’Immense Fatigue des pierres I will 
indicate the precise provenance of the citation by placing an abbreviated ver-
sion of the name of the individual short story in quotation marks after the ab-
breviated name of the book. For example, a citation from the second story, ‘Le 
Dibbouk inconnu’, will be marked (IFP, ‘Le Dibbouk’: 56). The following 
abbreviations will be used: ‘L’Immense Fatigue’ for ‘L’Immense Fatigue des 
pierres’; ‘Le Dibbouk’ for ‘Le Dibbouk inconnu’; ‘L’agenda’ for ‘L’agenda’; 
‘Gratok’ for ‘Gratok. Langue de vie et langue de mort’; ‘Mère perdue’ for 
‘Mère perdue sur le World Wide Web’; ‘Journal’ for ‘Journal de déglingue 
entre le Select et Compuserve’; ‘Manhattan bistrot’ for ‘Manhattan bistrot’. 
When citing Robin’s internet site, Papiers perdus, it will be impossible for me 
to give page references due to the nature of this internet site. Instead, I will in-
dicate that the quotation comes from ‘PP’ and then give the name of the frag-
ment from which my citation is drawn.

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
221 
Cast against a background of dispossession and homelessness, the 
identities of the characters that Robin constructs in her literary works 
are, then, fundamentally bound up with their relationships with space. 
More specifically, the post-Holocaust, twentieth-century Jewish 
experience of space is evoked in Robin’s work. This experience is 
shown in these texts to highlight the importance of migrations be-
tween spaces and to undermine any notion of ‘natural’ rootedness in a 
particular national space. For instance, in Papiers perdus, Robin’s 
most overtly autobiographical work, Robin’s textual avatar embarks 
upon an overt discussion of the importance of her parents’ migration 
from Eastern Europe to France. Her narrator asserts self-reflexively 
that ‘si tu étais née en Pologne, tu serais morte bien sûr aujourd’hui 
mais tu serais restée Rivkale et personne d’autre. Je dois à la France 
d’avoir été Régine’ (PP, ‘Rivka A’).2 It is a movement in space, then, 
that is cast as having saved Robin’s intratextual self’s life, a message 
that is repeated elsewhere in Papiers perdus (see ‘La Génération de 
mon père’). This migration, however, is also recognised as the source 
of her complex and divided identity, of her continued oscillation be-
tween different cultural codes and languages as Yiddish-speaking Riv-
kale of Polish Jewish origin at home, and French-speaking Régine at 
school. Moving between and inhabiting different spaces, then, is pre-
sented by Robin as of crucial importance: such movements wield life-
saving potential, but may have a radical impact upon cultural and lin-
guistic identity. 
In all three of Robin’s literary texts, the arbitrary and provi-
sional nature of belonging to any particular space is dramatised 
through speculation about the ways in which different destinations 
could have easily been chosen for key migrations. In Papiers perdus, 
for example, many fragments of the ‘Bistrots’ section are underpinned 
by variations on the theme of ‘si mes parents étaient arrivés en Améri-
que en 1932 au lieu de venir en France, j’aurais sans doute épousé un 
pitcher des Milwaukee Brewers’ (PP, ‘Le tabac des peupliers’). In 
L’Immense Fatigue des pierres, the main character of ‘Manhattan bis-
tro’ speculates at length about what would have happened if her par-
                                                 
2 
Rivka or Rivale is the name by which Robin was known at home, whereas 
Régine was the French name by which she was known at school and in her ca-
reer.

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
222 
ents’ families had, like so many other East European Jews, migrated 
to the US in the first decade of the twentieth century instead of staying 
in Poland. Not only would her family have contained ‘cinquante et un 
membres de plus’ (IFP, ‘Manhattan bistro’: 179) as they would have 
escaped the Holocaust, but her parents would have been brought up 
and educated as Americans. We are told ‘rien ne change et tout chan-
ge. Le nom d’abord. Rivka Ajzerstejn n’est pas devenue Régine Ro-
bin, mais Rebecca Ajerstein (prononcer Ajerstin). Une Américaine’ 
(IFP, ‘Manhattan bistro’: 180). This migration to a different space 
would have changed many aspects of life that are of critical impor-
tance to identity formation, particularly the protagonist’s name and 
family circumstances. In La Québécoite, the arbitrary nature of Ro-
bin’s characters’ occupation of particular spaces is made most obvious 
in a passage in which the main character of the first section speculates 
about a possible scenario for her grandfather’s migration from Eastern 
Europe to the US. Travelling by boat, he is constructed as casually 
agreeing to swap tickets with a friend, therefore ending up in Montreal 
rather than Chicago (Q: 24). Robin’s protagonist’s rhetorical question, 
‘sait-on jamais pourquoi on se retrouve ailleurs?’ (Q: 178) seems, 
then, particularly appropriate in indicating the fragility of any identity 
that is built upon the occupation of a particular space. 
In the works by Régine Robin that comprise the focus of my 
study in this chapter, then, it is clear that the intersections of space and 
identity are of paramount importance. Indeed, in their multifaceted 
narrations of tales of migration, these works are united by a shared 
will to dramatise the impact of inhabiting different spaces upon ques-
tions of identity and upon survival itself. Whilst the characters in these 
texts are cast as being clearly preoccupied by space and by their lack 
of a sense of belonging, the very notion of belonging in space is 
thrown into question by the apparently arbitrary nature of movements 
in space upon which identities are based. In this way, all three of 
Robin’s literary writings seem to directly question what it is to belong 
in space, particularly as a Jewish person struggling with the aftermath 
of the Holocaust. 
In addition to their greater generic complexity when compared 
to the writings addressed in the two previous chapters, then, it is im-
portant to note that the sense of home space and cultural belonging in 
Robin’s literary writings is also more complex than those that I dis-
cussed in the works of Hervé Guibert and Serge Doubrovsky.

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
223 
Whereas ‘Guibert’’s sense of cultural belonging could be said to be 
fundamentally based in certain areas of Paris, albeit being rendered 
more problematic by the advent of AIDS, and ‘Doubrovsky’’s could 
be said to be torn between France and the US, the sense of home space 
in Robin’s texts is less easily identified. Indeed, in what is perhaps the 
most sustained analysis of the role of space in Robin’s work, Rose-
mary Chapman argues that 
 
Robin’s texts, though written in French, include words and phrases in 
Yiddish, Hebrew and English, and historical, cultural and spatial ref-
erences to Eastern Europe, France, Britain, Hungary, Canada, the US, 
the former USSR, Israel and many more places. […] It is this multi-
plicity of points of reference which marks out Robin’s work from that 
of many other migrant writers for whom the experience of migration 
more typically involves a physical and psychological movement be-
tween two places. (Chapman 2000: 237) 
 
In accordance with the structure that I elaborated in chapter 2, the 
spaces of home and cultural belonging to be found in this, the final 
chapter of my study to focus upon the work of a single writer, are 
characterised by the greatest complexity. For reasons of both generic 
status and textual content, then, Robin’s works could be said to be the 
most prone to ambiguity and slippage. Chapman’s argument that ‘as 
readers we cannot settle in Robin’s texts, cannot establish our bear-
ings’ (Chapman 2000: 237-238) seems unquestionable. In the discus-
sion of Robin’s articulations of home space and cultural belonging 
that follows, distinguishing between the narrators and characters 
within each text will, by necessity, be difficult due to the deliberately 
ambiguous and shifting nature of Robin’s narrative. In order to over-
come this, when drawing upon specific textual examples, I will high-
light not only the volume, but the particular section of the work from 
which my citation is drawn. In this chapter I will analyse in turn the 
various types of cultural and spatial belonging that are proposed in 
Robin’s literary works, encompassing the notion of an idealised but 
lost home space, two significantly different urban spaces, the impor-
tance of intercultural spaces and the significance of non-lieux.

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
224 
5.1 Lost Home Space 
 
Perhaps the most consistent and stable formulation of home space 
throughout Robin’s works is that of a lost home space. This space is 
directly associated with Jewishness, as is demonstrated in La Québé-
coite in the first of the three parallel stories, in a passage in which the 
main character is lost and turns to those around to ask for directions. 
We are told that ‘elle leur demandait son pays, mais il n’existait pas 
ayant été oublié par Dieu au jour de la création. Un pays sans Histoire, 
sans date, sans traités, sans maître et sans serviteurs’ (Q: 66-67). From 
this, we can infer that a national space of belonging is lacking. 
Robin’s narrators display considerable nostalgia not just for lost home 
countries, but also for lost hometowns. The narrator of the first sce-
nario of La Québécoite, for example, professes the desire to ‘pleurer le 
grand deuil du ghetto perdu’ (Q: 81), a theme that is echoed elsewhere 
in Robin’s writings (see IFP: 20 and 36; Q: 63 and 102). The general 
loss of Jewish ghettos is accompanied in Robin’s works by the fre-
quent recurrence of one particular lost hometown, the ghetto of Ka-
luszyn in Poland.3 Kaluszyn is indicated in Papiers perdus, Robin’s 
autobiographical Internet project to be the very place in which the in-
tratextual Robin’s parents grew up (PP, ‘La Génération de mon père’) 
and is repeatedly cited as a long-established site of belonging. In this 
ghetto, we are told, many generations of the protagonist’s father’s 
family lived as musicians prior to World War Two. Moreover, within 
both ‘Manhattan bistro’ in L’Immense Fatigue and the internet project, 
it is here that the father’s all-important conversion to communism and 
early political activism are cast as having taken place (IFP: 201; PP 
‘La Génération de mon père), events which are presented as of endur-
ing significance for Robin’s textual protagonists’ senses of self. 
This Polish place, then, seems in some ways to correspond with 
the definition of a home space that I elaborated in chapter 1. It is a 
long-established, physical site of belonging that is marked by consid-
erable emotional investment when it is evoked by Robin’s protago-
nists. However, despite being repeatedly referred to in Robin’s writ-
                                                 
3 
In fact, references to Kaluszyn as a lost hometown recur not merely in those 
literary works that I am discussing here, but also in Robin’s theoretical writ-
ings. See, for example, Robin (1995a: 111).

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
225 
ings in this idealised way, Kaluszyn is certainly not presented as a site 
of ‘safety, security and dignity’, characteristics of home space de-
scribed by Stanislaus Kennedy (1996) that I discussed in chapter 1. On 
the contrary, it is synonymous with notions of loss and cultural de-
struction. The male narrator of ‘Le Dibbouk inconnu’4 in L’Immense 
Fatigue, for example, quotes a plaque found near the old site of the 
ghetto as saying: 
 
Kaluszyn en 1939: 
3000 Polonais 
6500 Juifs. (IFP: 63) 
 
Invoking Kaluszyn as once having been home to a substantial number 
of Jews, the narrator of this story frequently reminds us of the com-
plete decimation wrought by the war. Indeed, so thoroughly was the 
Jewish presence eradicated from this space, that the same narrator 
points out that ‘il n’y a même plus de cimetière à Kaluszyn’ (IFP, ‘Le 
Dibbouk’: 62). Likewise, in a lengthy section of poetic text that occurs 
a little later in the same text, we are told that 
 
Je n’ai rien vu à Kaluszyn. 
Il n’y avait plus rien à voir à Kaluszyn. 
Rien. Rien. 
Ni le vieux cimetière 
Ni le nouveau cimetière 
Ni la synagogue 
Ni la maison de ma mère avec un grand rosier devant 
Ni la confiserie de mon grand-père […]. (IFP: 60) 
 
The oft-invoked home space of Kaluszyn, then, is at once cast as a site 
of plenitude, of family and cultural stability, and as a site of lack – all 
has now disappeared. Constituting a symbol of idealised home space 
throughout Robin’s works, this construction of Kaluszyn emblem-
atises a ‘natural’ place of belonging from which Robin’s textual pro-
tagonists have been cut off. Whilst Kaluszyn is not evoked in La Qué-
bécoite, it is certainly true that there is evidence of a similar notion of 
                                                 
4 
This male narrator is revealed to have had a younger sister called Rivka, and 
as I argued in chapter 2, could loosely be seen as a fictional construction of 
Robin’s older brother.

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
226 
a lost or unknown home space. In the first scenario, for example, there 
is an overt profession of longing on the part of the principal female 
character for ‘son vrai pays […] son monde à elle, qu’elle n’aurait pas 
connu’ (Q: 69), and this is articulated in almost identical words by the 
main character of the second scenario (Q: 102). 
The presence of this lost home space, in addition to imbuing 
Robin’s narratives with a feeling of dispossession and lack, also pro-
pels to the foreground a vision of imaginary spaces of affiliation. As 
Rosemary Chapman points out in Siting the Quebec Novel (2000), for 
the children of immigrants in particular, since the Second World War 
the shtetl has taken on a mythical status, ‘surviving in stories, sayings 
and the Yiddish language, yet beyond their own experience. [The 
shtetl] has retained, though, immense symbolic power’ (Chapman 
2000: 258). This is evident within Robin’s work as the ‘monde dis-
paru’ of the Kaluszyn ghetto is cited as having constituted a principal 
focus of the bedtime stories of the father of the narrator in Papiers 
perdus (PP, ‘La Génération de mon père’). Far from simply narrating 
his past life, we are told that these stories overtly drew upon the fic-
tional, and whilst always communicating similar themes, demonstra-
ted ‘d’étranges variations’. Elsewhere in Robin’s work, in a volume 
entitled Le Naufrage du siècle (1995) that errs primarily on the side of 
theory rather than fiction, these stories are again referred to and their 
fictional nature is directly confronted. Robin asserts that ‘mon père ne 
saurait absolument rien de nos origines’, and so he answered her 
childhood questions ‘en me faisant une sorte de récit mythique des 
Juifs en général’ (Robin 1995a: 197-198). In those works that com-
prise the focus of my study here, a similar turn towards the imaginary 
when information is lacking is identifiable with regard to the protago-
nists’ home space. In particular, Robin seems to highlight the fact that 
in the destruction of Kaluszyn, it was not merely the physical fabric of 
the ghetto that was lost, but also a large part of the community’s his-
torical and cultural identity. In order to come to terms with the gaping 
holes in their own self-knowledge, survivors are presented as turning 
to the fictional and the imaginary. In terms of their sense of home 
space and cultural belonging, Robin casts the destruction of Kaluszyn 
as motivating her protagonists to turn towards imaginary spaces of af-
filiation (see IFP, ‘Le Dibbouk’: 61). 
Kaluszyn, then, is an anchoring point, the incomplete nature of 
which generates a tone of lack and separation in many of Robin’s nar-

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
227 
ratives, and demonstrates the importance of the imagination in the 
formulation of places of belonging. In chapter 2, I discussed Robin’s 
belief in the importance of creating fictional, proxy narratives in the 
aftermath of the Second World War in order to imagine the stories of 
those who had been killed. A parallel can, perhaps, be seen with the 
lost home space of Kaluszyn that I have discussed here: having been 
destroyed in the war, Kaluszyn is presented in Robin’s narratives as 
passing into the zone of the imagination and in this way constituting a 
proxy site of belonging. Indeed, these texts seem to suggest that if a 
‘natural’ home space has been destroyed, then there is little left to do 
other than to resort to the imaginary and the fictitious. 
In Robin’s literary writings, it seems that an idealised notion of 
home space is to be found in the Jewish ghetto, particularly that of 
Kaluszyn. This physical site of continuity and family roots evokes 
considerable emotional investment from Robin’s protagonists. How-
ever, this idealised home space is unfailingly presented as flawed 
within Robin’s work, as it has been destroyed. All three of Robin’s lit-
erary texts display a preoccupation with a lost home space, then, 
which both fills the narrative with a sense of not-belonging, and en-
courages protagonists to turn towards an imaginary notion of home. 
What, though, could be said to comprise ‘real’, physical spaces of be-
longing within Robin’s narratives? 
 
 
5.2 Urban Spaces of Belonging: Paris and Montreal 
 
Perhaps some of the most dominant images of non-imaginary spaces 
that are to be found within Robin’s writings are those of urban spaces. 
Robin constructs an extremely positive view of the urban, citing, for 
example, a poem by Chagall in which he describes the streets of the 
city as the place in which he is reborn and the city itself as like a 
finely tuned instrument to be played by inhabitants (Q: 40). It is upon 
the two most prevalent urban spaces of Robin’s œuvre that my discus-
sion will now focus: that is to say, the cities of Paris and Montreal.

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
228 
Paris 
 
Perhaps the closest thing to a home space that is actually in existence 
and is presented as having been experienced by the protagonists of 
Robin’s literary writings is that of the city of Paris. In the first story of 
L’Immense Fatigue des pierres, Paris is described as the ‘lieu 
d’origine’ (IFP, ‘L’Immense Fatigue’: 45) of the two principal charac-
ters. Moreover, this city, and in particular the Belleville area, is textu-
ally constructed as the site of childhood in all three of Robin’s literary 
texts (Q: 58; IFP: 85; PP, ‘le carnet magique’). In the first scenario of 
La Québécoite, considerable affinity is expressed with the Parisian 
quartier in which the main protagonist grew up, and we are told: ‘tu 
avais été ce morceau de Belleville au coin de la rue Piat et de la rue 
Vilin’ (Q: 58). Furthermore, this character’s childhood inhabitation of 
the heart of French physical and cultural space in Paris is presented as 
synonymous with a certain childhood affinity with Frenchness itself. 
We are told, for example, that ‘pour un peu, toi aussi tu te mettrais à 
traverser le Luxembourg, une besace sur le dos comme les dictées ti-
rées d’Anatole France’ (Q: 58). The implication is clear that in mov-
ing through the same spaces as a character in a typically French dicta-
tion text, Robin’s protagonist feels a sense of affiliation with both the 
space and the French culture that it represents. 
However, very much as it is in the work of Doubrovsky, 
Robin’s protagonists’ affinity with the childhood home of Paris is con-
structed as having been rendered significantly more problematic by 
the experience of the Second World War. Particular spaces of Paris 
are cast as continuing to resonate with the echoes of the anti-Semitic 
events that took place in them. This is clear in the following extract 
from the second section of Le Québécoite: 
 
La place de l’Abbé Henocque. Cette place si calme, si ombragée. 
C’est là qu’ils ont tué P. Goldmann- les souvenirs du Juif polonais né 
en France s’arrêtant là. UN JUIF POLONAIS ASSASSINÉ EN Fran-
ce. Tu te souviens de cette douleur violente quand tu appris la nouvel-
le. (Q: 101) 
 
In direct opposition to the way in which family associations with par-
ticular places are presented as forging positively connoted ‘lieux de 
mémoire’ within the Parisian cityscape for ‘Doubrovsky’, then, the 
horrific acts of the Second World War seem to be indelibly imprinted

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
229 
upon the urban fabric of Paris within Robin’s texts. Even the street 
mentioned as once the site of a childhood home and which therefore is 
connoted with a sense of belonging is polluted by the disturbing ex-
periences that occurred in it during the war. The narrator of the fourth 
story of L’Immense Fatigue is, for example, constructed as having 
spent a year in hiding during the Occupation of Paris, sleeping in a 
disused garage ‘sur un terrain vague au bout de la rue vilin’ (IFP, 
‘Gratok’: 85). It is on the corner of this very Rue Vilin that the main 
character’s mother is cast as being arrested during the 16 July 1942 
raids, only just escaping deportation (IFP, ‘Gratok’: 91). Perhaps the 
most powerful emblem of the indelible, unsettling marks of the Sec-
ond World War on the Parisian landscape can be found, as both Simon 
Harel (1992: 406) and Rosemary Chapman (2000: 263) note, in the 
recurring references to ‘Grenelle’ metro station. This site, from which 
Jews were deported in the particularly crushing and extensive ‘vent 
printanier’ raids of 16 July 1942, is the subject of frequent references 
within La Québécoite (Q: 194 and 204) and also features within Papi-
ers perdus (PP, ‘le cybercafé’). Punctuating and disrupting the narra-
tive at frequent intervals, the history synonymous with the site of 
Grenelle is constructed as a threat to the coherence of the city of Paris 
itself. We are told: ‘Paris se déchire […] Rien que Paris au métro Gre-
nelle’ (Q: 206). The space of Paris, then, constructed as a childhood 
home space, is shown to have been compromised by the events of the 
Second World War and the indelible marks it has left on particular 
sites within the city. In this, a space with which Robin’s protagonists 
have established a private sense of affiliation and personal belonging 
is shown to have been invaded and undermined by the ideological dis-
course of anti-Semitism. Whereas for ‘Doubrovsky’ the anti-Semitic 
discourse was at least partially transmitted into the home by his own 
parents, for Robin’s textual avatars any notion of home space within 
the city of Paris is polluted by the public phenomenon of History, 
which remains enduringly emblematised by the Grenelle metro sta-
tion. 
In L’Immense Fatigue des pierres, the impact of the Second 
World War upon the space of Paris is made particularly explicit. Much 
as it is in Doubrovsky’s narratives of Paris, the wartime period is con-
structed in this text as fissuring the city into two distinct worlds. These 
take the form of the world of the Yiddish speaking Jew whose life is 
in constant danger, and that of the French-speaking Paris of Aryans

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
230 
and Nazis, which remains a place of freedom and relative hedonism. 
We are told that 
 
Ainsi à Paris, il y avait deux vies, deux mondes qui ne se rencontraient 
que dans ces moments furtifs qui duraient une demi-seconde. Le mon-
de de ceux qui portaient l’étoile, qui devaient se cacher, qui parlaient 
tout bas, qui parlaient yiddish, et le monde de ceux qui buvaient du 
champagne, qui allaient au caf’conc’, qui chantaient J’attendrai et qui 
allaient au guignol. (IFP, ‘Gratok’: 90) 
 
Whereas in Doubrovsky’s autofictions the division of Parisian space is 
formulated around a political or ideological notion of ‘good’ and 
‘bad’, synonymous with collaborationist and resistant elements of so-
ciety, in Robin’s texts the two worlds within the city are presented as 
divided primarily upon ethnico-religious grounds. In both cases, the 
discourses structuring society can be seen to be materialised in space.5 
As the citation above demonstrates, the two halves of Paris are pre-
sented as requiring and permitting strikingly different types of behav-
iour. Despite the clear rules and expectations of particular people in 
this space, Robin does not suggest that her protagonist establishes a 
simple sense of belonging and selfhood. With reference to the main 
character of this story within L’Immense Fatigue, we are told: ‘elle 
apprit à séparer les deux mondes, celui de la mort et de la vie. Elle sa-
vait qu’elle appartenait aux deux et que sa vie […] c’était l’entre-
deux’ (IFP, ‘Gratok’: 90). Hiding in a garage with her Jewish mother 
by night and spending the day with her Aryan French nanny, Juliette, 
the protagonist of this story is constructed as learning to switch flu-
ently between languages and cultural codes. Indeed, so fluent in this 
does she become that even as a small child she is presented as refrain-
ing from displaying her familiarity with the language being spoken by 
German soldiers in Juliette’s house. As Robin has commented else-
where, the German and Yiddish languages are remarkably close (Ro-
bin 1993a: 131), and revealing familiarity with the former might have 
given away the protagonist’s Jewishness. Even in the deeply polarised 
cityscape of wartime Paris, then, Robin does not suggest this protago-
                                                 
5 
This notion of social relations being ‘materialised’ in space is discussed by 
Barker (2000: 296).

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
231 
nist to establish any simple sense of belonging, but rather positions her 
within the entre-deux, a notion to which I will return. 
The city of Paris does remain a recurring presence in Robin’s 
writing, her adult protagonists often regularly visiting the pastures of 
the left-wing intelligentsia such as the famous cafes and bistros of the 
Left Bank (Q: 135; IFP: 55; 77; 146). However, this compromised, di-
vided site of youth and adolescence is constructed as affecting Robin’s 
adult protagonists in similar ways to those that I identified in chapter 3 
in relation to ‘Doubrovsky’. That is to say that the experience of hav-
ing lived in the fissured, divided space of wartime Paris is presented 
as leaving its mark, and Robin’s adult protagonists are often cast as 
unable to establish a single, stable home space. In La Québécoite, for 
instance, specifically referring to the division of Paris during the war, 
the narrator of the first scenario comments: 
 
Ses déambulations ressemblent à des fuites lentes entre deux rafles. 
Elle ne saurait jamais où la porteraient ses pas. Désormais le temps de 
l’entre-deux. Entre deux villes, entre deux langues, entre deux villes, 
deux villes dans une ville. L’entre- les parenthèses qu’on appelle en 
yiddish des demi-lunes. (Q: 63) 
 
That an almost identical refrain is repeated later in this work (Q: 152) 
as well as in Papiers perdus (PP, ‘le cybercafé’) indicates the ongoing 
significance of the ‘entre-deux’. Unsettled by their wartime experi-
ence of Paris, Robin’s adult protagonists are cast as unable to continue 
living there in any stable way, and as condemned to inbetweenness. 
Indeed, this city is rarely positioned as the site of a long-term, 
permanent home for Robin’s adult protagonists. In La Québécoite, for 
example, in both the first and second scenarios, it serves as a summer 
holiday destination. We are told: ‘on irait l’été à Paris’ (Q: 104). The 
protagonist, however, expresses ambiguous feelings about this: 
 
On serait bien. Par moment quelque chose clocherait. Cela viendrait 
par surprise, se faufilant dans les interstices d’un bonheur aux mailles 
serrées. On ne pourrait jamais prévoir ces moments lourds. (Q: 36) 
 
The nature of this lurking, negative feeling is not made explicit, 
merely hinting that Paris as a home space remains problematic. Even 
in ‘Le Dibbouk inconnu’ and ‘Mère perdue sur le World Wide Web’, 
stories within L’Immense Fatigue in which the respective protagonists

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
232 
live permanently in Paris, it is on journeys elsewhere, to Washington 
and Montreal respectively, that the narrative drama relies (IFP, ‘Le 
Dibbouk’: 53-74 and IFP, ‘Mère perdue’: 99-125). The ambiguous na-
ture of Paris as a home space then, is perhaps best summed up by the 
narrator of ‘Mère perdue sue le World Wide Web’ in L’Immense Fa-
tigue, who tells us that 
 
chez soi, chez soi! […] Y a-t-il jamais un chez-soi? […] Pour moi, il 
n’y a que Paris. Je ne sais plus qui a dit qu’on pouvait se faire chier 
n’importe où, mais qu’il valait mieux alors se faire chier à Paris, tu 
comprends? (IFP: 120) 
 
Tellingly, the protagonists of both La Québécoite and L’Immense Fa-
tigue who have left Paris to live elsewhere in adulthood seem to battle 
with ambiguous desires to return to the city. At the end of the first 
scenario in La Québécoite ‘elle’ does indeed choose to come back to 
Paris and we are told: ‘elle se serait retrouvée rue de la Mare à Paris, 
dans le vieux quartier de son enfance’ (Q: 89-90). Trying to make a 
fresh start, however, is presented as impossible as ‘rien ne serait plus 
jamais comme avant. La France aurait changé’ (Q: 90), a refrain 
which is repeated at the end of the second and third scenarios when 
the main character attempts the same thing (Q: 167 and Q: 206). A 
similar feeling of the impossibility of finding the old Paris causes the 
protagonists of the first story of L’Immense Fatigue to reach the oppo-
site decision, and to opt not to return. The narrator asserts: 
 
revenir à Paris leur semble impossible à l’une et à l’autre. En vingt 
ans, la France a trop changé et il n’y a pas de retours en arrière. Re-
trouver quoi exactement? Je me souviens d’un coin perdu aujourd’hui 
disparu […]. (IFP, ‘L’Immense Fatigue’: 46) 
 
This Paris, then, is not only tarnished by the war, but is also infused 
with a feeling of being under threat and at risk of disappearing. It is 
shown, in short, to manifest traits that also characterise the lost home 
space of Kaluszyn. However, it is no longer the catastrophic extremes 
of war and ethnic cleansing that threaten Paris, but a rather more 
mundane enemy: that of property speculation. In the fourth story of 
L’Immense Fatigue we are told: 
 
Depuis, presque tout a disparu, le garage, le terrain vague, le réverbè-
re, les escaliers de la rue Vilin, et même la rue Vilin et le passage Ju-

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
233 
lien-Lacroix. La spéculation immobilière s’est acharnée sur tous ses 
souvenirs. (IFP, ‘Gratok’: 94-95. See also PP ‘La Génération de mon 
père’) 
 
That the forces of modernisation are destroying not only those spaces 
of Paris that represent the city’s more glorious past but also those in 
which the narrator’s most painful memories are stored, seems particu-
larly harsh. Indeed, it seems that the old threat posed to the cultural 
identity of the Parisian cityscape by anti-Semitism has been replaced 
with a new one: that of gentrification. The space of Paris, it seems, 
cannot be relied upon to bear witness to the events of personal impor-
tance that are constructed as having taken place in it. 
The city of Paris then, a recurring presence within Robin’s 
texts, is constructed as a stable site of childhood, tarnished and ren-
dered problematic by the events of the Second World War, reminders 
of which linger in the cityscape. Unable to fully detach themselves 
from this city, Robin’s protagonists follow complex spatial itineraries, 
frequently involving some degree of inhabiting Paris. The locus of 
their repeated arrivals and departures, this city is continually juxta-
posed with other cities in which Robin’s protagonists also live. Just as 
in Doubrovsky’s autofictions, it is the New World that provides an al-
ternative home space for most of Robin’s protagonists. Whilst display-
ing some interest in the New York that is so fundamental to Dou-
brovsky’s writings, Robin’s works are focused primarily on the city of 
Montreal. Indeed, critic Simon Harel argues that this city is so influen-
tial within La Québécoite that it influences the protagonist’s percep-
tion of her childhood home, Paris. He asserts that ‘[Paris est la] ville 
centrale dans La Québécoite de Régine Robin mais qui est toujours 
perçue à travers le prisme montréalais’ (Harel 1992: 401). Implying 
that the two cities of Paris and Montreal are inextricably linked, Harel 
even proposes that they blur into an indistinguishable construction of 
the urban in Robin’s writings. Whilst the non-linear, achronological 
structure of Robin’s writing frequently leads to a close and sometimes 
confusing juxtaposition of these two cities, I wish to maintain that 
each retains a very distinct individual identity. As Ralph Sarkonak ob-
serves in relation to the constructions of Paris and Montreal in Robin’s 
writing, ‘each has […] a distinctive urban texture, complete with 
unique friends and lovers, streets and metro lines’ (Sarkonak 1987:

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
234 
100). It is precisely this, the distinct identity and role of Montreal 
within Robin’s writing to which my discussion will now turn. 
 
 
Montreal 
 
Montreal is undoubtedly the other space that is offered in Robin’s 
writings as a possible hometown. Perhaps most strikingly, unlike Pa-
ris, this city is constructed in Robin’s work as a space in which Jew-
ishness, rather than being an object of repression, is presented as an 
acceptable element within a diverse cultural cityscape. In L’Immense 
Fatigue des pierres, for example, there is mention of both a Jewish 
hospital and a Jewish library (IFP, ‘Mère perdue’: 107 and 111), the 
existence of which suggest an established and substantial Jewish 
population. Moreover, in the same story, one of Robin’s protagonists 
describes glimpsing a group of ‘hassidim’6 in the street in Montreal. 
Rather than being condemned to attempting to hide their Jewishness 
as they would have had to in wartime Paris, in the city of Montreal 
their presence is visible and they move freely ‘en costume avec leur 
caftan et leur shtraïml’ (IFP, ‘Mère perdue’: 109). Jewishness is pre-
sented as similarly unproblematically woven into the urban fabric of 
Montreal in La Québécoite. In the third scenario, for example, we are 
told that ‘partout [il y a] des boucheries kascher, des synagogues, des 
maisons de prières et des congrégations. La Bagelerie Van Horn, 
l’épicerie Budapest et le marché Aviv’ (Q: 190). Picking up on the 
theme of food, in the first scenario of La Québécoite we are told: ‘il y 
aurait aussi à l’angle de Décarie et de Queen Mary le restaurant Pum-
pernik Cornichons – harengs – Creplar – Knödle’ (Q: 30). The signifi-
cance of this is clear: the evidence and availability of Jewish food 
types is presented as inherently bound up with the existence of Jewish 
culture and traditions within this city. In fact, Robin herself has com-
mented elsewhere that food often plays a crucial role in the transmis-
sion of culture and tradition between generations (Robin 1995a: 128), 
                                                 
6 
Hasidism is a Jewish movement that emerged in Eastern Europe in the 18th 
century. The majority of communities were destroyed in the Holocaust in 
Eastern Europe, but some remain in the UK, US and Israel. Followers are 
identifiable by their distinctive traditional dress, including, for men, Homberg 
hat, streidel and dark suit.  See Lavina and Dan Cohn-Sherbok (1995: 70-71).

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
235 
an argument that finds considerable support within Laura U. Marks’ 
The Skin of the Film: Intercultural Cinema, Embodiment and the Sen-
ses (2000). In this, Marks stresses the importance of food to those who 
have been displaced from their land of origin, arguing that ‘food is 
central to many cultures […] In the absence of other records food be-
comes even more a vehicle of memory’ (Marks 2000: 225). For those 
who have changed cultural space, then, particularly those such as 
Robin’s protagonists who have been harshly cut off from their cultural 
heritage, the presence of traditional foods within the cityscape may 
help to forge a sense of belonging. 
Indeed, Robin’s literary depictions seem to tap into a wide-
spread perception of the city of Montreal as not only containing a 
sizeable Jewish community, but as being characterised by cultural plu-
ralism in general. Simon Harel, for example, argues that whilst Paris 
may be described as ‘un centre métropolitain relativement immuable’, 
Montreal is remarkable for its ‘porosité’ (1992: 401). Moreover, he 
argues that 
 
Le Québec, société post-industrielle en continent nord-américain, se 
voit bon gré mal gré projeté au coeur d’un monde où la constitution 
interculturelle est une préoccupation constante. […] L’identité québé-
coise n’est pas la reconnaissance d’un destin stable et prévisible dont 
des citoyens autochtones seraient les légataires, mais plutôt une struc-
ture ouverte. (Harel 1992: 375)  
 
Reinforcing the view of this city as an open, multicultural place, critic 
Pierre Nepveu has commented upon the increasing audibility of the 
voices of immigrants in the last two decades within the literature 
stemming from this city (Nepveu 1999: 190). Such a view seems to be 
supported in Robin’s writings since, in addition to emphasizing the 
presence of visible Jewishness in Montreal, the narrator of the fifth 
story of L’Immense Fatigue overtly describes the city as ‘une métro-
pole cosmopolite’ (IFP, ‘Mère perdue’: 110). The view of Montreal as 
a cosmopolitan city is reinforced in La Québécoite, in which it is de-
scribed as 
 
Ville schizophrène 
patchwork linguistique 
bouillie ethnique, pleine de grumeaux 
purée de cultures disloquées 
folklorisées

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
236 
figées 
pizza 
souvlaki 
paella. (Q: 82) 
 
Different food types are, again, positioned as emblems of cultural di-
versity and mixing in this passage and as distillations of Montreal. In-
deed, whilst Paris is characterised within Robin’s works as a site of 
nostalgic remembrance, tarnished by its binary, ethnic and racial divi-
sion during the war, Montreal is cast as considerably more forward-
looking. We are told: ‘Montréal est une de ces métropoles où se lit dé-
jà en clair l’avenir de toutes les métropoles. L’hybridité comme nou-
velle identité, comme seule forme de mémoire collective’ (IFP, 
‘L’Immense Fatigue’: 48). It is clear that it is hybridity and cultural 
pluralism that are positioned as symbols of the progressiveness of 
Montreal in Robin’s narratives. 
For Robin’s protagonists, constructed as having lost the natural 
home space of the ghetto, and condemned to instability by the experi-
ence of wartime Paris, the open and plural space of Montreal is in 
some ways an ideal setting. Seeming to pinpoint those very issues that 
are most in question for Robin’s protagonists, Alain Médam has re-
cently argued that 
 
l’urbanité montréalaise implique la mise en scène d’une sociologie de 
l’entre-deux. Ville métropole dont la trame complexe est composée de 
multiples quartiers, Montréal, par son intégration malaisée dans 
l’ensemble québécois, remet en question l’élaboration d’une identité 
unitaire. (Médam cited in Harel 1992: 389) 
 
Médam asserts, then, that the space of Montreal evokes a radical ques-
tioning of notions of singular, unified selfhood. This message is rein-
forced by Ralph Sarkonak who argues that ‘inbetweenness is anchored 
in the fabric of the urban space of Montréal, as though it were some 
giant, concrete metaphor of otherness’ (Sarkonak 1987: 101). The ap-
propriateness of Montreal space for Robin’s characters who are firmly 
marked by the ‘entre-deux’ and the plurality of their identities as I ar-
gued above, is clear. 
However, far from being cast as a value-neutral melting pot of 
cultures in which plural identities are unproblematically accommo-
dated, in Robin’s writing the city of Montreal displays a mixed bag of

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
237 
positive and negative traits. Some aspects of its curious mix of French 
and North American cultures are clearly constructed as pleasurable in 
Robin’s texts. For example, in the second section of La Québécoite, 
the narrator elaborates upon how ‘elle’’s life would have been in this 
scenario and we are told: ‘elle se serait follement amusée à voir cette 
France d’opérette mi-René Clair, mi-comédie américaine’ (Q: 105). 
This city is far from a simple construction of an idealised France on 
the North American continent though, being firmly inscribed with the 
culture of ‘américanité’. The narrator of the first part of La Québécoite 
comments that ‘ici on parle français/ et /on pense américain’ (Q: 86). 
In the second scenario, the protagonist’s frustrations become clear 
when she is reminded by her husband that her cherished communist 
ideals have no place in Quebec’s political spectrum. Mockingly, her 
husband accuses her of ‘europcentrisme’ and tells her: ‘va donc re-
joindre le parti communiste, avec toi ils seront assez nombreux pour 
jouer au bridge […]. Tu me fatigues avec tes critères européens’ (Q: 
132). A little later in the same section of this work, the main charac-
ter’s husband again reinforces her status as an outsider by warning her 
not to interfere in local politics. We are told that her husband ‘aurait 
pris l’habitude de lui dire que n’étant pas d’ici, elle n’y connaissait 
rien’ (Q: 132). Far from comprising a site in which many voices of 
differing cultural and ethnic origins speak with equal volume, Mont-
real is painted in Robin’s narratives as remaining tainted by a clear 
cultural hierarchy. This city may comprise a diverse range of peoples, 
but it is clear that they are not all equally empowered or equally im-
bued with a sense of cultural and spatial ownership. 
It is pertinent to note that even the diverse range of food types 
which I argued above to emblematise the visibility and presence of a 
wide range of cultures within Robin’s narratives are accompanied in 
her texts by the ultra-American presence of fast food. This is particu-
larly evident in La Québécoite, in which we read: 
 
un Québec coke 
un Québec french fries 
un Québec avec des rôties, de la relish et du 
  
 
ketchup 
  
des œufs retournés et du bacon. (Q: 85) 
 
Perhaps more importantly, the sense of belonging forged by the pres-
ence of traditional Jewish foods in Montreal is cast as undermined for

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
238 
Robin’s protagonists by their symbolic over-powering by the domi-
nance of ‘américanité’ as ‘tout est pris dans la graisse, l’huile, la mar-
garine américaine – vous assaisonnez vos salades avec le Kraft dress-
ing sucré’ (Q: 82). Indeed, the narrator of the first section of this work 
seems to express anxiety about the serious impact of these smothering, 
fatty substances upon the cultural identity of those whose origins are 
elsewhere. We are told that 
 
L’oubli commence par le goût des aliments, après la couleur du ciel, le 
son des voix, l’odeur des rues. Qui se souvient de la piazza Navona, 
des ramblas de Barcelone, des ruelles d’Athènes? Qui se souvient du 
ghetto de Varsovie? […] LOVE IT OR MAPLE LEAVE IT. (Q: 82) 
 
Whereas Marks suggests that traditional foods could comprise an em-
powering way of keeping in touch with their cultural memory for mi-
grants and exiles (Marks 2000: 234), the metaphorical smothering of 
other cultural food types in the bland, numbing sauces representative 
of American culture, is cast in Robin’s work as the first stage in the 
loss of an immigrant’s culture of origin. The command to ‘LOVE IT 
OR MAPLE LEAVE IT’ seems to suggest that the ethnic minorities 
of Montreal must embrace North American ways of eating or leave 
the country, an imperative incongruous with a genuinely cosmopolitan 
society. 
Indeed, it seems that Robin’s writings on Montreal space not 
only seek to investigate the personal significance of this city for her 
intratextual avatars, but could also be seen to constitute more general 
interventions in debates around the very nature of cosmopolitanism it-
self. Drawing again upon the work of Alain Médam, Simon Harel 
makes a highly pertinent contribution to this discussion in an article 
entitled ‘La Parole orpheline de l’écrivain migrant’ (Harel 1992: 389-
392). Here, he asserts that the notion of cosmopolitanism, highly rele-
vant to Montreal, is far from transparent and he argues further that ac-
cepting the notion of cosmopolitanism as denoting an unproblematic 
coexistence of different cultures within a particular space is danger-
ously over-simplistic. Harel identifies various different types of cos-
mopolitanism, each of which represents a different model or strategy 
for the coexistence of different cultures within a particular space. One

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
239 
such strategy, for example, may be seen in those multicultural socie-
ties that attempt to transcend ethnicity, subscribing to a desire for a 
universal culture.7 The dangers inherent in this model, in its suppres-
sion of ethnic diversity and non-conformist cultural traditions are 
clear. An alternative model of cosmopolitanism may take the form of 
an accumulation of cultures and ethnicities that are optimistically con-
ceived of as building up in a harmonious addition of differences and 
which require no subscription to a notion of super- or universal cul-
ture. Harel again overtly signals the dangers inherent in this model, 
asserting that ‘ces différences culturelles, faute d’être dites et de faire 
l’objet d’une inscription dans le discours social, deviendront autant de 
ghettos permettant à chacun d’aller quérir son éthnicité’ (Harel 1992: 
390). Far from enabling any real state of dialogue between cultures 
and ethnicities, then, this variant of cosmopolitanism suggests a state 
in which different cultures exist distinctly and separately, albeit in 
close physical proximity with each other. 
Seeming directly to engage with this last vision of a cosmopoli-
tan society, particularly in La Québécoite, Robin’s textual construc-
tion of Montreal invokes a society whose divisions and inequalities 
are evident in its physical character. In the third section of La Québé-
coite, for example, as Robin’s protagonists stroll home across the city 
one evening, we are told that ‘on quitte un ghetto pour un autre, […], 
chez les Juifs, puis chez les Italiens, en passant par chez les riches. 
Que des ghettos, Tu as remarqué?’ (Q: 190). The city of Montreal is 
posited here as highly spatially segregated on both ethnic and wealth 
lines, suggesting the presence of distinct ghettos, a fact that does 
seem, at least superficially, to afford the different groups a sense of 
belonging. We are told, for example: ‘chacun ici dans son petit quadri-
latère-refuge, ses bouts de rue, ses repères’ (Q: 192). The ‘ville d’exils 
                                                 
7 
In this model, certain parallels can be seen with French society and its tradi-
tions of ‘laïcité’ and the universal ideals of ‘Liberté, Égalité et Fraternité’. 
Many examples could be cited to support this view, but see particularly 
Jacques Dubois on the subject of Parisian cultural industries. He argues that 
‘la république des lettres est certes hospitalière à tous les républicains. Mais 
elle tolère mal que votre langue, votre imaginaire, votre comportement institu-
tionnel diffèrent des siens. Comme si l’identité culturelle française, puissante, 
souveraine, ne pouvait supporter l’existence d’une altérité culturelle française, 
celle de l’autre dans le même’ (Dubois 1991: 124).

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
240 
juxtaposés’ (Q: 192) that La Québécoite textualises is far from a melt-
ing pot in which cultures mix and blur. Instead, Robin portrays a soci-
ety in which different ethnic and cultural groups retain very distinct 
identities, lifestyles and home spaces, a characteristic that, as I argued 
in section 1.0.3, has been identified by urban geographers to be typical 
of many North American cities.8 In her theoretical writings, Robin has 
indicated that the very movements of her protagonists around Mont-
real in La Québécoite were constructed in order to demonstrate the 
difficulties presented by ‘la cohabitation et la coexistence de commun-
autés ethniques et culturelles différentes’ (Robin 1989: 132). As 
Chapman argues specifically in relation to La Québécoite, whilst this 
form of ‘ethnic ghettoization’ is presented as initially offering a super-
ficial sense of belonging for protagonists, it must eventually lead to 
entrapment in stereotype (Chapman 2000: 266). Indeed, in the section 
of La Québécoite in which this type of cultural landscape is most 
prominent, the main character does indeed fail to establish a satisfac-
tory sense of belonging and home space and does eventually return to 
Paris. In La Québécoite it is clear, then, that Montreal is portrayed as a 
space where different cultures do come into contact and mix with each 
other to a much greater extent than in Paris, as is evident in the wide 
availability of different food types and the fact that Robin’s protago-
nists are presented as free to move across the different ghettos of the 
city. However, constituting more of a complex patchwork of cultures 
than a melting pot, Montreal could be said to be constructed within 
Robin’s work as a cultural contact zone, if not a site of real cultural 
mixing. 
Defined by Mary Louise Pratt as ‘social spaces where disparate 
cultures meet, clash and grapple with each other, often in highly 
asymmetrical relations of domination and subordination – like coloni-
alism, slavery, or their aftermaths as they are lived out across the 
globe today’ (Pratt 1992: 4), the notion of the cultural contact zone 
seems particularly appropriate to Robin’s construction of Montreal. 
Despite its apparent freedom from the extreme and exclusionary dis-
courses with which Robin portrays Paris, this city is certainly not pre-
sented as a value-free space in which the immigrant can easily estab-
                                                 
8 
The most famous example, as I discussed in chapter 1, being the city of Los 
Angeles, as discussed by Davis (1984).

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
241 
lish a sense of belonging. Rather, it is a space that is imbued with a 
range of competing cultural values operating within a complex net-
work of power relations, amongst which new arrivals must establish 
their sense of self and belonging. As I argued above, in La Québéco-
ite, Robin casts Montreal as occupied by ‘américanité’ and the neo-
colonial forces of globalisation. Perhaps more significant for Robin’s 
characters in La Québécoite, however, is the postcolonial struggle that 
inhabits the spaces of this city. Robin’s construction of her protago-
nists as of French origin weaves considerable complexities into their 
identities and undermines the possibility for them of forging senses of 
belonging within the space of Montreal. In La Québécoite, for exam-
ple, we are informed that it is impossible for this originally French 
woman to become ‘Québécoise’. In order to do so 
 
il lui aurait fallu faire oublier sa trop visible «francité», son accent où 
percerait sans qu’il y paraisse un je-ne-sais-quoi d’impérialisme cultu-
rel, ses années de Sorbonne, d’Ecole normale supérieure, ses années 
de cursus honorum un peu trop parfait, faire oublier toutes ses parisia-
nités. (Q: 105) 
 
It is not merely the fear of specifically anti-French feeling that pre-
vents the establishment of a home space in Montreal, but a more gen-
eral fear of the Quebec nationalist movement. Whilst deliberating 
upon which way to vote in the referendum, for example, the protago-
nist of the second scenario in La Québécoite expresses 
 
La peur de l’homogénéité 
 de l’unanimité 
 du Nous excluant tous les autres 
 du pure laine 
 elle l’immigrante 
la différente 
la déviante. (Q: 133) 
 
Reputed for its cultural diversity, Montreal is however represented 
within Robin’s works as a space that is occupied by a range of neo-
colonial, postcolonial and other cultural values. The space of this city 
is in some ways, then, the battleground upon which these cultural 
forces are fighting for dominance, and is a far cry from the harmoni-
ous and peaceful melting pot of cultural diversity that it is sometimes 
perceived to be.

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
242 
Perhaps unsurprisingly, Montreal is not constructed as permitting the 
establishment of an entirely settled, comfortable home space for any 
of Robin’s protagonists. The complexity of the situation is best 
summed up in the fifth story of L’Immense Fatigue des pierres, when 
an Argentinean friend advises the protagonist: 
 
Oh! tu sais, on ne se sent jamais vraiment d’ici. C’est un pays bien 
compliqué. On n’en fait pas vraiment partie, non. Mais on s’y sent 
bien. C’est comme si on était à la fois dedans et dehors, à la bordure, 
jamais totalement impliqué, mais jamais totalement indifférent. Ce 
n’est pas le sentiment de l’exil, non. C’est un ailleurs. On n’est pas 
chez soi, voilà tout. (IFP, ‘Mère perdue’: 119-120) 
 
A return to the work of Simon Harel is, again, helpful. In his discus-
sion of the role of Montreal in the works of ‘des écrivains migrants’, a 
corpus that includes Robin’s own work, Harel highlights the differing 
status of Montreal for various immigrants. For some, this city of cul-
tural diversity is adopted as a final destination or point of arrival in 
which their migration will end. For others, however, the situation is 
more complex. He tells us: 
 
Montréal peut aussi caractériser une inscription topique éclatée, une 
mémoire fragmentaire, défusion des langues, douleur du sujet qui erre 
dans une ville qu’il ne peut habiter. Montréal comme hors-lieu. C’est 
le sens des écrits de […] Régine Robin. (Harel 1992: 388-389) 
 
This notion of the hors-lieu is generally attributed to Marc Augé, an 
anthropologist whose work I drew upon in chapter 1. Displaying con-
siderable familiarity with both Augé’s work and the theory surroun-
ding the hors-lieu or non-lieu,9 Robin asserts that non-lieux may be 
defined as ‘tous lieux où l’on ne fait que passer, dans lesquels on se 
trouve en transit, dans l’anonymat malgré tout l’arsenal d’identifica-
tion des cartes à puce, des codes particuliers etc’ (Robin 1997a : 236). 
She goes on to explain that Augé opposes these non-lieux to those 
spaces traditionally conceived by anthropologists as markers of iden-
tity, such as the local and familiar spaces which are charged with the 
weight of history, family and culture. Robin proposes non-places to 
                                                 
9 
In her theoretical work, Robin uses the terms ‘hors-lieu’ and ‘non-lieu’ inter-
changeably (Robin 1989: 181).

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
243 
permit ‘une démagnétisation de l’épaisseur historique et de ses conno-
tations’ (Robin 1989: 181). This is particularly relevant to any under-
standing of Robin’s protagonists’ attempts to establish senses of be-
longing. As I have argued, it is the weight of the physical and cultural 
decimation wrought by the Holocaust that prevents many of Robin’s 
protagonists from occupying either the idealised home space of Ka-
luszyn or the tarnished space of Paris. It is the ‘ville désémantisée’ 
(Harel 1992: 409) of Montreal, one that is free of a singular, totalising 
meaning or history that Robin turns to in order to ‘laisser parler cette 
voix narrative du lointain, de l’ailleurs, du neutre, bref ce que j’appelle 
le hors-lieu’ (Robin 1989: 17). 
Montreal, then, this open, plural and perhaps chaotic space 
permits ‘la mise en scène d’une multiplicité des mémoires’ (Harel 
1992 : 401). Whilst no simple sense of belonging is established here, 
the cultural and ethnic plurality means that the city is sufficiently in-
coherent for the incoherence of traumatic holocaust memories to be 
remembered by Robin’s protagonists. We are also told that 
 
Montréal chez Robin traduit l’inscription topique paradoxale d’une 
ville qui, au lieu de consolider un sentiment d’identité, introduit une 
mélancolie difficile. […] En somme, Montréal dans ce roman de Ro-
bin accentue la certitude d’un effondrement déjà éprouvé mais diffici-
lement énoncé (le passé traumatique que représente la rafle de juillet 
1942 à Paris). (Harel 1992: 400-401) 
 
In the complex, multi layered space that is Montreal, one that is inhab-
ited by a range of conflicting cultural debates, the plurality of Robin’s 
protagonists’ identities can be accommodated. Far from a space of 
prescription and entrenched notions of identity and history, this space 
is constructed to be shifting and open to renegotiation. 
The notion of Montreal as a space of the possible is particularly 
explicit in La Québécoite, a work whose narrative drama is, as I have 
already indicated, structured around three possible, parallel stories, 
each variants of the others and each articulated around a different 
home space. The settings for these parallel scenarios range from the 
house of an aunt in the mainly Jewish quarter of Snowdon; to a house 
‘au sein de la bourgeoisie québécoise dans les hauts d’Outremont, 
dans une belle maison cette fois’ (Q: 97); to the mainly immigrant 
area ‘autour de la marché Jean Talon’ (Q: 171 and 180). The divided, 
fissured space of Montreal is presented as the inspiration for each of

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
244 
the different scenarios. Whilst some features of the life constructed for 
the protagonist remain constant in each of the three scenarios, many 
aspects seem to correspond with the particular place in which the pro-
tagonist lives each time and to differ accordingly. In the bourgeois 
scenario, for example, this space is shown to penetrate even the pro-
tagonist’s relationship with her own physical being. We are told that 
in this scenario, and this scenario alone, she would devote consider-
able time and effort to ‘aimer son corps, à se sentir bien dans sa peau’ 
(Q: 103). Not only do these scenarios dramatise the segregated nature 
of Montreal, then, but they also demonstrate the significance of these 
spaces, and in particular these houses for the protagonist’s identity in 
La Québécoite. Having examined the recurring constructions of Ro-
bin’s protagonists’ lack of sense of belonging in these works on both 
national level and at the level of the hometown, it is to the microscale 
of spatial belonging that my discussion will now turn. I wish to argue 
in what follows that in Robin’s textual constructions of houses, similar 
debates about cultural diversity and cosmopolitanism are in play. 
 
 
5.3 Houses 
 
Not merely underpinning the narrative drama of La Québécoite, 
houses are similarly evident in L’Immense Fatigue des pierres. The 
first story of this collection dramatises a mother-daughter relationship 
at a crisis point, the catalyst for which is the daughter’s decision to sell 
her home. In the subsequent debate about where each will live in the 
future, issues surrounding the nature of home and belonging are inter-
rogated. It is pertinent to note that common to both La Québécoite and 
L’Immense Fatigue is the sturdy, substantial nature of the home 
spaces that are evoked. In the first story of L’Immense Fatigue, for ex-
ample, we are told that ‘il s’agit d’une énorme maison de pierres 
blanches, ocres, rosées avec un bow-window surmonté d’une grande 
terrasse’ (IFP, ‘L’Immense Fatigue’: 8). Similarly, in La Québécoite, 
we learn that ‘la maison à pignons aurait trois niveaux en comptant 
l’entresol aménagé. De grandes galeries de bois ajouré recevraient le 
soleil du matin’ (Q: 149). The depiction of these sturdy, enduring 
houses seems to be linked by Robin’s narrator in the fourth story of 
L’Immense Fatigue with the general feeling of dispossession and

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
245 
quest for a place of belonging in this story. We are told that what the 
main character desires is 
 
Une maison avec un escalier de pin ancien comme l’illusion de 
l’enracinement. 
  
LA PORTE REFERMÉE, UN PAYS, 
à soi quelque part. […] Une maison pour mourir de mort naturelle de 
vieillesse ou de maladie. (IFP, ‘Gratok’: 97-98) 
 
The houses presented in these writings are often described as being at 
least partially made of stone (IFP, ‘Gratok’: 98). Consideration of the 
symbolic nature of stone as a long lasting material used not only to 
build solid structures but also often used for memorial artefacts such 
as gravestones, permits us to deepen our understanding of the role of 
houses within Robin’s writing. In a poem discussing those members 
of her family who have been lost, the narrator of the first story of 
L’Immense Fatigue tells us: 
 
je leur donnerai dans ma maison et dans mes murs 
Une place et un nom… qui ne périra pas. (IFP: 21) 
 
Perhaps employed as a touchstone whose evocation combats the es-
sential feeling of dispossession and homelessness that pervades these 
texts, these solid houses represent not just a type of sanctuary for the 
present, but also a site for safeguarding the preservation of the mem-
ory of those who have disappeared. 
Further examination of the descriptions of houses in Robin’s 
works indicates that whilst they are solid, enduring constructions that 
provide sanctuary and a site of remembrance, these dwellings do not 
attempt simply to iron out the problematic kinks of identity, but are 
inherently inscribed with the marks of cultural pluralism. Our intro-
duction to the all-important homestead in the first story of L’Immense 
Fatigue, for example, tells us that ‘le rez-de-chaussée est carrelé 
d’azulejos mexicains’, and that the shelves contain ‘[des] statues rap-
portées de lointains voyages, en particulier du Mexique et de Bolivie’. 
Furthermore, it is furnished with ‘des masques […] indonésiens, 
mexicaines, africains’ as well as an Afghan trunk, a Persian vase, a 
Pleyel piano from Paris and ‘un samovar comme Mémé avait rapporté 
de Pologne’ (IFP, ‘L’Immense Fatigue’: 8-10). A home similarly 
filled with a panoply of artefacts from a wide range of cultures is evi-

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
246 
dent in La Québécoite. Here, the house occupied by the main charac-
ter of the second scenario contains ‘un tapis de Perse’; ‘des pièces de 
cuir travaillées par de lointains Amérindiens’; ‘une plaque de rue de 
Paris’ as well as ‘des statues africaines’ and a diverse selection of 
newspapers including ‘Le Monde et Le Nouvel Observateur – Busi-
ness Week – Fortune – Playboy et Penthouse’ (Q: 98-100). This house 
is portrayed as a key meeting place for the protagonist’s range of im-
migrant friends. The narrator asserts that this space of freedom would 
contain 
 
pas de stéréotype. Les Latino-Américains n’auraient pas de guitare, 
les Ukrainiens ni Kobzal, ni balalaïka. […] Les exilés, de nulle part, 
sans attente, parlant toutes les langues et affrontant tous les défis his-
toriques. Leurs paysages par moments tricoteraient un patchwork, bi-
garré. (Q: 143) 
 
Seeming to constitute solid, enduring structures, then, the houses that 
Robin depicts in her writings also appear in some ways to resemble 
the cityscape of Montreal. Comprising multicultural spaces in which 
cultural artefacts from many different places coexist and in which 
those members of the family lost in the Holocaust can be remembered, 
the parallel with Montreal is clear. The view of cosmopolitanism of-
fered by these houses, however, is perhaps more idealised. Rather than 
being segregated into distinct ghettos, the different cultures emblem-
atised in the varying cultural artefacts decorating these houses’ interi-
ors combine and coexist to constitute a harmonious space. 
Perhaps one of the most crucial dimensions of these home 
spaces, as constructed in Robin’s literary writing is, however, the fact 
that the protagonists are constructed as almost always feeling com-
pelled to leave. Each of the three scenarios in La Québécoite, for ex-
ample, ends with the protagonist returning to France. Similarly, as I 
argued above, the first story of L’Immense Fatigue consists of the 
drama arising from one of the protagonist’s desires to sell her long-
term homestead: ‘la fille veut ficher le camp de ce lieu qu’elle a cru 
habité par les dieux […]. Et puis, la déception, ce n’est pas ce qu’on 
croyait, on n’est vraiment pas chez soi…’ (IFP, ‘L’Immense Fatigue’: 
46). Even these solid, enduring structures, then, are shown to have 
failed to become stable home spaces in which the protagonists can un-
problematically reside. In La Québécoite, reflecting upon the failure

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
247 
of the third scenario to reach the satisfactory resolution of the estab-
lishment of a stable home space the narrator wonders: 
 
Où la mener? Elle ne peut tout de même pas habiter tous les quartiers 
de Montréal. […] Lui donner des amants de toutes les nationalités et 
après? Restera l’exil, l’éternel sentiment d’être ailleurs, déracinée. 
Montréal ou Paris, Budapest ou Jitomir ou New York. Les villes se 
cherchent et se répondent dans la nuit. Parfois elles se ressemblent. 
Quelle importance! Quelque part dans l’imaginaire de la ville. (Q: 
187) 
 
It seems then, that there is much justification for Chapman’s argument 
that ‘just as neither a country nor a city ensure a coherent or stable 
identity, nor can a home, the domestic space, offer any permanence, 
any possibility of “enracinement”’ (Chapman 2000: 265). The cities 
of Paris and Montreal, as well as the various houses depicted, are all 
presented as possible home spaces. However, none is cast as constitut-
ing an enduring, long-term site of belonging. Unable to live stably in 
any one house or city, perpetual movement is the lot of Robin’s pro-
tagonists, and my discussion will now turn to that movement. 
 
 
5.4 Travelling Identities/ Dwelling in Travel 
 
Movement constitutes a recurring leitmotif in Robin’s work. The nar-
rator of the first scenario of La Québécoite asserts, for instance, that 
‘depuis toujours nous sommes des errants’ (Q: 63). Considerably later 
in the work, in the third scenario, a similar opinion is uttered: ‘j’aime 
ça, l’errance. J’aime ça, être perpétuellement ailleurs’ (Q: 178) and the 
verb ‘errer’, suggesting a movement without a fixed destination or 
purpose, recurs in various forms on many occasions (Q: 80; 83; 154; 
178). In L’Immense Fatigue des pierres, a similar sentiment is evident 
in the first story, the protagonists telling us for example: ‘nous som-
mes des errantes, des étoiles filantes, toujours à côté de nos pompes, 
de nos lieux, de nos langues’ (IFP, ‘L’Immense Fatigue’: 11). Consid-
erably later in the work, in the fourth story, the life of one character is 
summed up with the words: ‘après tout, la vie de sa mère, c’était ça et, 
sans doute, ça n’était que ça. Allées et venues, écriture, lectures, ren-
dez-vous’ (IFP, ‘Gratok’: 82). Movement is clearly placed at the top 
of this list of characterising features. In both works, then, the protago-

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
248 
nists are shown to continually leave one home space in order to set out 
for a new one. 
It seems that rather than being a journey between two fixed 
places, it is the condition of movement itself that is important to 
Robin’s protagonists. For example, at one stage in La Québécoite, the 
narrator comments: ‘l’autre rive. Oui, l’autre rive. Passer la Seine ou 
l’Atlantique’ (Q: 56). The implication is clear that it is not the destina-
tion that is important, but the action of moving, of covering distance. 
Indeed, movement is portrayed as so insidious, so inescapable that it 
even exceeds the control of the narrator. In the second scenario, com-
menting on the protagonist of La Québécoite, for example, the narra-
tor says: 
 
ce personage fantôme m’échappe. Impossible à fixer dans cette géo-
graphie urbaine, dans cet espace mouvant. Dès qu’elle est installée, in-
tégrée, elle s’enfuit, déménage, et m’oblige à casser le récit alors que 
je commençais à m’y installer moi-même, à y prendre goût. (Q: 138) 
 
The question of why this desire for movement should be so prepon-
derant within the text is overtly posed as the narrator of La Québécoite 
asks ‘pourquoi ces cavalcades d’un lieu à l’autre, d’une langue à 
l’autre, d’une histoire à l’autre ces sauts, ces fuites, ces retours, ces 
remords?’ (Q: 139). 
Simon Harel suggests that migrants are often not only characte-
ristically obsessed with topological inscription, but are also often ‘dé-
sireux de poursuivre l’errance car la quête du lieu perdu […] peut être 
la source d’une nostalgie intarissable’ (Harel 1992: 388). His remarks 
illuminate the activities of Robin’s protagonists who are indeed pro-
pelled into motion by the loss of their idealised home space. As I ar-
gued above, however, it is the weight of history no less than the com-
plexities of Robin’s protagonists’ plural identities that can be identi-
fied as motivations for movement. We are told that ‘le poids de ces 
millions de morts m’étouffe. En errance d’Europe en Amérique avec 
ces morts encombrants qui réclamant leur dû dans un silence assour-
dissant’ (Q: 141). Confronted with the responsibility of remembering 
all those who died in the holocaust, Robin’s protagonists are con-
demned to continual movement in an impossible search for a place in 
which their memories can be heard. Moreover, in the first story of

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
249 
L’Immense Fatigue, weighed down by this impossible quest, one pro-
tagonist expresses the incredible fatigue that it brings. She asserts that 
 
il me faut un coin où l’Histoire cesse d’enforcer ses vrilles dans la 
chair humaine, un coin d’ombre amnésique, idyllique […]. Ne plus 
migrer. Ne plus bouger, ne plus chercher un lieu. Cesser de croire 
qu’ici, enfin, on va déposer ses valises, on va être bien, on va souffler. 
Enfin chez nous. Enfin à nous. Enfin. S’arrêter simplement ici ou là, 
ici plutôt que là, comme ça. (IFP, ‘L’Immense Fatigue’: 30-31) 
 
Again, the actual destination seems to be less important than move-
ment, or rather, in this case, the impossible desire to stop moving. 
With all meaning and logic disrupted by the Holocaust, Robin’s pro-
tagonists are constructed as unable to live stably and coherently in any 
one place, but are propelled into constant movement and an impossi-
ble quest. In La Québécoite, the narrator of the second scenario as-
serts: ‘ERRER/ Noter toutes les différences, faire un inventaire, un ca-
talogue, un nomenclature. Tout consigner pour donner plus de corps à 
cette existence’ (Q: 154). In the impossible juxtaposition of a desire to 
remember the past and awareness of the impossibility of any meaning-
ful and coherent historical narrative, Robin’s protagonists are con-
demned to fragmented movement and to list-making. 
Rather than arguing any one place to constitute more of a home 
space to Robin’s protagonists than another, it seems more appropriate, 
then, to subscribe to the notion of ‘dwelling-in-travel’. This under-
standing of travel as home space derives from the work of ethnogra-
pher James Clifford. As he is deeply concerned with the relationship 
between notions of home and travel, in his 1988 work The Predica-
ment of Culture, Clifford addresses the assumption that dwelling 
represents the most significant site of any community, and that travel 
is merely a supplement. That is to say, he attempts to reassess the 
common belief that being ‘rooted’ in a particular space is of greater 
importance for identity formation than the ‘routes’ that individuals 
trace. He proposes a reconceptualisation of notions of travel and cul-
ture, arguing that practices of displacement and movement play an 
important role in constructing cultural meanings. Accepting that ‘loca-
tion’ can be an itinerary rather than a bounded site as Clifford argues, 
it is easy to see that Robin’s protagonists, propelled into movement by 
the excesses of the Holocaust, situate their identities in movement 
rather than stasis. Moreover, the protagonists of these works are con-

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
250 
structed as perpetually caught up in a struggle with their essentially 
plural and divided selfhoods. Clifford’s assertion that diasporic living 
can represent a way of maintaining connections with more than one 
place whilst practising non-absolutist citizenship is clearly relevant 
(Clifford 1997: 9). Movement between places is constructed in Ro-
bin’s works as permitting a wider definition of selfhood. As one cha-
racter of La Québecoite asserts: ‘je me sens/ new-yorkais de Paris ou/ 
montréalais du Shtetl si vous voulez’ (Q: 35). These complex and 
fluid identities are clearly better served by the notion of itineraries 
rather than single home spaces. 
The notion of ‘dwelling-in-movement’ can also be seen to inter-
sect with the notion of non-places that I related to Robin’s work in an 
earlier section of this argument. As Marc Augé explains, non-places 
are particularly prevalent in sites pertaining to air, rail and motorway 
travel.10 Within Robin’s work, non-lieux aeroplanes and airports are 
highly visible. The first story of L’Immense Fatigue, for example, is 
shared between two parallel characters, each on a different long-haul 
flight, preparing to meet up in Paris. One of these characters expresses 
strong feelings of belonging within planes, asserting that ‘peut-être ne 
suis-je moi-même qu’en avion, dans l’absence aux abords du ciel, 
dans les lames noires, la houle duveteuse des nuages, et bientôt l’or-
ange, le violet du lever de soleil, nulle part, sur l’océan’. She goes on 
to claim that ‘mes racines sont en l’air, sans identité et sans lieu’ (IFP, 
‘L’Immense Fatigue’: 30). Not only does this character feel most at 
home whilst flying through the unidentifiable spaces of the sky in an 
aeroplane, but the primary meeting place for her and her daughter is 
that of airports (IFP, ‘L’Immense Fatigue’: 13). Their regular meet-
ings at ‘les aéroports les plus divers, La Guardia, Kennedy, O’Hare, 
Roissy, Orly, Ben Gurion’ are described and she goes on to explain: 
 
on les a presque tous faits. J’en connais tous les recoins, les cafétérias, 
les restaurants, les chiottes, les stands de journaux […]. Nous passons 
une partie de nos vies dans ces aéroports entre deux avions qui ne vont 
jamais dans la même direction. (IFP, ‘L’Immense Fatigue’: 15-16)  
 
                                                 
10 
Robin’s own discussion of Augé’s ideas is particularly useful. See Robin 
(1997a: 235-238).

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
251 
Clearly, both airports and aeroplanes themselves are exactly the sort 
of ahistorical sites that are free of any family or community meanings, 
and therefore may be classified as non-lieux. Moreover, the sense of 
belonging felt in these places is markedly less problematic than in the 
other places I have discussed. The non-places of airports and aero-
planes are free of painful historical memories and of cultural contact, 
and perhaps more importantly, being located in such places is always 
provisional. These spaces are, in sum, cast as relatively unproblematic 
sites of belonging, 
Pertinently, another locus of transit which the narrator of the 
first story of L’Immense Fatigue describes as ‘comme un second chez 
moi’ (IFP, ‘L’Immense Fatigue’: 40), is that of the various hotel 
rooms in which the protagonist regularly stays when travelling around 
the country visiting editors. The narrator explains that 
 
de Hilton en Sheraton, de Holiday Inn, je connais par coeur ces cham-
bres fonctionnelles, sans apprêt, où la douche est bonne […], où l’air 
conditionné fonctionne toujours en été et le chauffage en hiver, où la 
télé en couleur ne fait jamais défaut et où l’on peut se faire réveiller à 
telle heure, se faire apporter une bière et un club sandwich n’importe 
quand. (IFP, ‘L’Immense Fatigue’: 39-40) 
 
An identical sentiment of belonging is expressed in Papiers perdus, 
when the narrator describes hotel rooms as possessing ‘[la] charme 
des non-lieux, des lieux éphémères, de passage, lieux-prothèses’ (PP, 
‘chambres d’hotel’). She goes on to explain that she has a weakness 
for bland places ‘sur lesquels on peut projeter ce qu’on veut, pas en-
combrés de passé, de mémoire, disponibles’(PP, ‘chambres d’hotel’). 
Such spaces are clearly a long way from the spaces of Paris that re-
main inscribed with the conflicts of the Second World War, and even 
from the home spaces constructed in Montreal in which the quest for 
empowering cultural diversity is played out. These non-lieux are con-
structed as allowing Robin’s textual avatars to escape the weight of 
history and, perhaps, to ‘cesser de se battre encore avec l’altérité’ 
(IFP, ‘L’Immense Fatigue’: 31). 
The three life writing texts by Robin that I have examined in 
this chapter depict particularly complex visions of home space and 
cultural belonging. Haunted by the lost home space of the ghetto, dis-
illusioned by the tarnished childhood space of Paris, it seems initially 
that the multicultural space of Montreal is the closest thing to a space

Robin: Lost, Imaginary, Urban and Moving Home Spaces 
252 
of cultural belonging for Robin’s personnages. Even this site of plu-
rality and mixing, however, is shown to be occupied by a struggle for 
dominance within the cultural hierarchy, and it is in movement and 
ahistorical non-lieux that the characters peopling Robin’s texts are 
presented as establishing their most unproblematic senses of home.

6. 
Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
 
 
As I discussed in chapter 1, the experience of space is argued by a 
growing body of theorists to have changed in recent times. At a schol-
arly level, the perception of space as a neutral, passive arena in which 
events merely take place is increasingly rejected, and there is growing 
recognition that space is an active, meaningful force in the formation 
of culture and society. Spaces are, it is argued, imbued with ideologi-
cal meanings, and hence are subject to and part of the power relations 
that structure the world. In more practical terms, innovations in trans-
port and telecommunications technologies mean that contact between 
spaces, and hence between cultures, is both more prolific and more in-
stantaneous than at any previous time. The implications of this for cul-
tural and national identities are clearly highly significant. On a smaller 
scale, the everyday spaces in which individuals move may be charac-
terised by greater complexity and plurality, by networks of multiply-
layered, multiply-coded places, and by the growing influence of mul-
tinational capital rather than international geopolitics in the contempo-
rary world. Of great importance to this book has been Fredric Jame-
son’s hypothesis that these changes in the nature and experience of 
space are inextricably bound up with the emergence of postmodern-
ism. Perhaps of yet greater significance in this chapter is Jameson’s 
contention that, faced with the bewildering and disempowering nature 
of contemporary space, there is a pressing need for the creation of new 
maps. That is to say that, according to Jameson, the only way in which 
to overcome the confusion that is so endemic in the contemporary 
world, is through deepening our understanding of the postmodern 
space that disorientates us. As I discussed in chapter 1, this argument 
has been developed by Brian Jarvis, who proposes that what we need 
in order to better understand contemporary space is not the creation of 
new maps but a new definition of maps. In fact, Jarvis suggests that 
the maps we need may already be in existence in the form of contem-
porary artwork. Drawing upon this argument, as well as those of other

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
254 
key theorists, at the end of chapter 1 I posed the question of whether 
or not contemporary life writing could, in fact, be seen as a form of 
the ‘postmodern cartography’ that Jarvis called for. 
If cartography is understood as the ‘science of map-making’ 
(Oxford English Dictionary), then ‘postmodern cartography’ can be 
interpreted as a way of representing space that is particularly appro-
priate to the postmodern world. A number of superficial compatibil-
ities between life writing and postmodern thought suggest that perhaps 
life writing could indeed be seen to be an appropriate arena in which 
to map contemporary space. For instance, as I discussed in chapter 1, 
a key concern of contemporary cultural geographers in relation to the 
representation of space is the need to move away from over-reliance 
on ‘science’ and ‘facts’. Those such as Peter Dicken and Peter E. 
Lloyd claim that such an over-dependency has led to generalisations 
about society and to the neglect of the individual in the geographical 
scholarship of recent decades (Dicken and Lloyd 1981: 1). These crit-
ics claim that not only must the individual constitute a greater focus of 
any study of the postmodern world, but that such studies must em-
brace the subjective, non-rational elements of human experience. That 
is to say that traditional maps that rely upon an apparently objective 
representation of physical and ‘factual’ features of particular spaces, 
are no longer accepted to be adequate depictions of the postmodern 
world. The experience of any space may be affected not only by the 
physical characteristics of that space, but also by the cultural and po-
litical meanings, the imaginary and personal associations, with which 
it is infused. Autobiographical writing, then, in which an individual 
sketches out a vision of his or her life, often touching upon experi-
ences that are deeply personal as well as those that are widely shared, 
may perhaps constitute an important way of ‘mapping’ space. 
In addition, as I discussed in chapter 1, Cultural Geographers 
such as Steve Pile and Nigel Thrift have highlighted the importance of 
developing ways of understanding space that do not rely on fixed and 
static representations. They propose the notion of ‘way-finding’, 
which they argue to comprise a ‘down-on-the-ground’, multi-layered 
view of space as an alternative to that offered by conventional maps. 
Rather than representing a single view of space conceived at one mo-
ment in time from a bird’s eye view, ‘way-finding’ proposes a more 
‘mobile’ and plural form of representation (Pile and Thrift 1995: 1). 
Whilst space has always been a changing and plural matter of study,

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
255 
the particular attributes of postmodern space that I elaborated upon in 
chapter 1 may make the call for non-static representations of space 
particularly pressing. The multi-layered depiction of space that is of-
fered by a life writing text, one that may change and progress along-
side the development of the narrative, may prove to be a privileged 
way of representing the deeply complex character of postmodern 
space. It seems, then, that life writing may offer a way of knowing and 
mapping the world that complies with some of the most fundamental 
calls of postmodern thought, and some of the basic requirements that 
underpin the notion of ‘postmodern cartography’. 
In this chapter, a more rigorous discussion of the possible com-
patibility between life writing and Jarvis’s notion of postmodern car-
tography will be undertaken. In addressing this complex question, I 
will seek to bring into dialogue the material discussed in the previous 
five chapters and to focus in particular upon the ways in which the life 
writings of Doubrovsky, Robin and Guibert could be said to map the 
postmodern world. The first section of this examination will link the 
arguments of chapters 1 and 2 by discussing the ways in which the 
type of experimental life writings, often autofictions, that have been 
discussed in this study could be said to be classifiable as ‘postmod-
ern’. That is to say, to what extent could the ontological and philoso-
phical tenets underpinning the life writings of Doubrovsky, Guibert 
and Robin be said to be compatible with postmodern thought? Next, 
focusing upon the work of each author in turn, I will examine firstly 
the ways in which the spaces depicted in each of their life writing cor-
puses could be said to display postmodern characteristics. Then, draw-
ing upon the notion that a map could comprise not merely a passive 
representation but also an active guide to the contemporary world, I 
will examine the extent to which in producing life writing texts, these 
three authors could be said to be undertaking a form of ‘way-finding’ 
or down-on-the-ground mapping of the postmodern world. That is to 
say, by way of conclusion to my discussion of each author’s works, I 
will discuss the extent to which the production of these life writing 
texts could be said to serve as a form of orientation through which a 
more concrete sense of belonging in the postmodern world can be 
forged. 
As in previous chapters, the order in which the three individual 
œuvres will be analysed is dictated by the content of the discussions 
themselves. Thus, the general discussion of autofiction will lead into a

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
256 
section on Doubrovsky due to the obvious relationship between these 
topics and the clear evidence of a parallel between Doubrovsky’s lit-
erary project and the notion of postmodern cartography. Reflecting the 
diminishing ease with which simple links can be drawn between their 
literary corpuses and the characteristics of postmodern cartography, 
the discussion will then focus on the works of Robin and finally those 
of Guibert. 
 
 
6.1 Autofiction and Postmodernism 
 
In chapter 1, I argued that whilst the phenomenon of postmodernism is 
deeply ambiguous and surrounded by contention, it can be usefully 
mobilised by the identification of a set of characterising ‘family 
traits’. I wish to contend here that a similarly useful group of ‘family 
characteristics’ can be identified in relation to postmodern literature. 
Perhaps more importantly, as my discussion will now demonstrate, 
these postmodern characteristics are greatly in evidence in the ex-
perimental life writing texts of Guibert, Doubrovsky and Robin that 
this study has addressed. 
In Postmodern Literary Theory (1997), Niall Lucy argues that 
one of the most notable traits of literature during the postmodern pe-
riod has been a tendency to undermine strict genres (Lucy 1997: 84-
85). As I discussed in chapter 2, one of the distinguishing features of 
the life writings of Serge Doubrovsky, Hervé Guibert and Régine 
Robin is the generic experimentation that each of their oeuvres dis-
plays. Whilst retaining a clear desire to draw upon their own life ex-
periences as inspiration for their literary productions, each of these 
writers rejects allegiance with the established and much-theorised 
genre of classic autobiography. In the case of Doubrovsky and 
Guibert, I have argued their writings to be classifiable as autofiction. 
So important is generic experimentation to this type of life writing that 
John Ireland has speculated about whether this literary formulation 
owes its very existence to the desire to undermine the genre of classic 
autobiography (Ireland 1993: 4). With regard to Robin, so generically 
diverse and prone to slippage is her literary corpus that more precise 
classification than ‘experimental life writing’ is problematic. As I dis-
cussed in chapter 2, it is clear throughout her literary writings that 
rather than being an incidental effect of the creative process, generic

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
257 
innovation is a formative element of her writerly project. The life writ-
ing of each of these three authors, then, clearly demonstrates the 
genre-twisting characteristics that Lucy has proposed to be typical of 
postmodern literature. In chapter 1, I elaborated upon the importance 
within postmodern thought of undermining and unsettling the rational, 
organising features of the Western world, such as binary categories. In 
the same way, these literary texts display a will to undermine the es-
tablished categories of literary analysis. It seems then that in this re-
gard, the life writing texts constituting the focus of this study are un-
derpinned by ontological tenets that show allegiance with postmodern 
thought. 
Another significant way in which established categories and 
boundaries are often undermined within postmodern literature is iden-
tified by Niall Lucy in terms of the relationship between creative and 
critical practices. That is to say that, according to Lucy, the distinction 
between literature and theory is often eroded in postmodern literature 
(Lucy 1997: 32). Again, this is an argument with which the life writ-
ings of the three authors studied here are greatly in tune. As I dis-
cussed in chapter 2, Doubrovsky played a key role in not just writing 
the first piece of literature that was overtly labelled autofiction, but 
also in forging and theorising the genre-bending notion itself. More-
over, within Doubrovsky’s work, the theorisation of this literary phe-
nomenon often spills over into the autofictions themselves (LLB: 256; 
UAS: 90; LPC: back cover). In this, then, the boundary between the 
creative and the critical is eroded, just as Lucy argues to be typical of 
postmodern literature. With regard to Robin, this characteristic is also 
in evidence. Within her work, there is a strong intertext between those 
texts that could best be categorised as ‘theoretical’ and those that are 
primarily ‘literary’. To cite but one of many examples, the primarily 
theoretical Roman mémoriel, for instance, contains discussions of both 
La Québécoite and L’Immense Fatigue des pierres (Robin 1989: 130 
and 179).1 Within Guibert’s experimental life writing texts, the blur-
                                                 
1 
Other examples of the close relationship between Robin’s theoretical and lit-
erary writings can be found in ‘Vous! Vous êtes quoi vous au juste? Médita-
tions autobiographiques autour de la judéité’, in which Robin discusses La 
Québécoite (see Robin 2001c: 111-125). In addition, at a thematic level, fur-
ther correspondences can be seen between the theoretical and literary elements 
of Robin’s oeuvre. Themes that I have identified within Robin’s literary writ-

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
258 
ring of the boundary between literary criticism and creation is perhaps 
less obvious, Guibert having participated little within the field of liter-
ary theory. However, his autofictional works certainly dialogue with 
the world of the arts in general as well as sometimes covertly drawing 
upon the theories of those such as Michel Foucault and Roland 
Barthes. In addition, the author’s work as a photography and art critic 
for Le Monde often seems to serve as a source of literary inspiration. 
The postmodern trait of eroding the distinction between literary crea-
tion and theory, then, is greatly in evidence in the works of Dou-
brovsky and Robin, and evident to a lesser extent in Guibert’s writ-
ings. 
In fact, the blurring of boundaries within postmodern literary 
texts is to be found not only within the content and structure of these 
works, but it is also evident from the changed relationship that such 
examples of literature typically have with the external world. In his 
(1999) study entitled Theorizing the Avant-Garde: Modernism, Ex-
pressionism and the Problem of Postmodernity, for example, Richard 
Murphy asserts that postmodernism challenges modernism’s assump-
tion that art and life are separate realms (Murphy 1999: 267). Lucy re-
inforces the argument by telling us that alongside the general ‘debunk-
ing’ of all that is revered in society, postmodern thought has called 
into question the separate and privileged status of literature. He ex-
plains: ‘I think “postmodernism” refers to the generalization or flat-
tening out of the romantic theory of literature which marks it as a 
“radical” theory of the nonfoundational, structureless “structure of 
truth”’ (Lucy 1997: ix). That is to say that whereas literature used to 
be privileged over other modes of cultural production as having a par-
ticular capacity to perceive and express ‘truth’, it is seen in the post-
modern world as ‘just another text’ that is deeply implicated in real 
life. In the case of the three writers studied here, some correspondence 
with this argument is evident. The works of Doubrovsky, Guibert and 
Robin, for example, are certainly all deeply embedded in society and 
reality. Far from representing the type of ‘flight of imagination’ of 
which literature is sometimes accused (Mallory and Simpson-Housley 
1987: xii), each writer draws deeply upon his or her own life. In this 
way, the works could be said to correspond with the postmodern trait 
                                                                                                         
ings, for example, the importance of the Yiddish language are to be found 
within her theoretical works (see Robin 1993a).

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
259 
of merging life and literature. Moreover, rather than suggesting litera-
ture to contain some sort of privileged, self-contained ‘truth’, each of 
these writers seems to use the literary arena as a place in which to ex-
plore and articulate some of the most deeply pressing contemporary 
questions about identity and belonging. The writings of all three of 
these authors are typically postmodern, then, in that they are not only 
deeply preoccupied with the external world, but they position litera-
ture as a privileged arena in which to explore issues of subjectivity, 
rather than in which to find an innate and pre-existing worldly truth. 
Concomitant with the reassessment of the relationship between 
art and life that Lucy claims to have been spawned by postmodern 
thought has been a reappraisal of the status of the author. At least 
partly as a result of poststructuralist thought, Lucy argues that the 
status of the author has been greatly diminished in postmodern think-
ing. Rather than seeing literature as a work of genius, we are told, 
postmodernism believes it to be produced by forces that are deeply 
embedded in society and are beyond the control of any individual. The 
active, productive role of language and the unconscious are, then, 
foregrounded in postmodern literature (Lucy 1997: 1). In terms of the 
works of literature studied here, this trait of postmodernism could be 
said to be least evident in the work of Guibert. In Guibert’s case, his 
syntactical and linguistic style is predominantly rational and conven-
tional, seeming to retain the illusion that the author might be in full 
control of the text. As will be evident from my discussion in chapter 2, 
however, the importance of language and the unconscious is very 
clear in the works of Doubrovsky. As I argued earlier in this mono-
graph, these are presented as playing a primary role in dictating both 
the form and the subject matter of Doubrovsky’s autofictions. Simi-
larly, Robin’s literary texts are marked by highly poetic uses of lan-
guage, often involving the complete abandonment of conventional 
prose page layouts and uses of punctuation. Indeed, the writings of 
Doubrovsky and Robin both seem to display some of the specific 
characteristics of language identified by Magnan and Morin in a work 
entitled Lectures du postmodernisme dans le roman québécois (1997) 
as typical of postmodern texts. In this, they argue that whereas mod-
ernism pushed language to the limits of meaning, postmodernism is 
more associated with the multiplication of meaning rather than its dis-
appearance. Both Robin and Doubrovsky could be said to multiply 
meaning in their use of fragmented, complex writing styles that incor-

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
260 
porate frequent puns and word play, and their inscription of more than 
one language in their texts. Through the inscription of languages such 
as English, German and Yiddish in Doubrovsky’s case, and English, 
Spanish and Yiddish in Robin’s, these Francophone texts are rendered 
ambiguous and multiply-coded without meaning being undermined al-
together. Francophone scholar Lise Gauvin specifically addresses con-
temporary writers’ innovative approaches towards language in her 
rhetorical question: ‘faut-il lire dans ces pratiques de décentrement, de 
rupture, voire de transgression et de questionnement du statut des lan-
gues […] des exemples du postmodernisme?’ Her own feeling is un-
equivocal: ‘assurément’ (Gauvin 1997a: 14). 
A further characteristic of the literary writings of Doubrovsky 
and Robin that is particularly in tune with postmodern thought is their 
preoccupation with fragmentation and plurality.2 On the back cover of 
Laissé pour conte, for instance, Doubrovsky’s textual voice tells us 
that 
 
A l’inverse de l’autobiographie, explicative et unifiante, qui veut res-
saisir et dérouler les fils d’un destin, l’autofiction ne perçoit pas la vie 
comme un tout. Elle n’a affaire qu’à des fragments disjoints, des mor-
ceaux d’existence brisés, un sujet morcelé qui ne coïncide pas avec 
lui-même. (LPC, back cover) 
 
The implication is clear that autofiction, as opposed to classic autobi-
ography, is underpinned by a will not to totalise and explain a life 
story, but to convey a considerably more fragmented and partial pic-
ture. This argument was reinforced by Doubrovsky in a recent inter-
view when he professed his desire to ‘donner l’impression d’une vie 
détotalisée, fragmentaire’ (Doubrovsky in interview with Hughes), a 
phrase which could be taken from a postmodern textbook. A very si-
milar notion of life writing is openly flagged in Robin’s Papiers per-
dus. In this, Robin’s intratextual avatar asserts that 
 
[un texte autobiographique] ne pourrait se penser aujourd’hui que 
dans le fragmentaire, le disparate, l’hétérogène, confronté à la mort 
des grands récits, en particulier du récit de soi, le soi ne serait plus 
                                                 
2 
As literary critics Lucie-Marie Magnan and Christian Morin inform us, in 
postmodern novels ‘la narration revêt souvent un caractère hétérogène’ (Mag-
nan and Morin 1997: 43).

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
261 
pensable en dehors de sa division, de son ou de ses clivages (PP, ‘Mail 
de soi’). 
 
Eschewing the singular, unified textual construction of selfhood that a 
classical autobiography would foreground, Robin refutes any sense of 
identity being singular and coherent and rejects any notion of life writ-
ing that does not incorporate this rejection. It seems, then, that there is 
considerable evidence to suggest that the works of Doubrovsky and 
Robin are underpinned by postmodern principles and reveal postmod-
ern characteristics.3 
In relation to Guibert’s writing, critical opinion is divided as to 
whether or not it can be categorised as postmodern. Hillenaar argues, 
for example, that Guibert’s work cannot be considered postmodern 
because ‘[Guibert] ne rejette pas nécessairement toute notion d’un moi 
fixe et cernable, il s’intéresse plutôt au dévoilement de soi’ (Hillenaar 
cited in Boulé 2001: 528). Lawrence Schehr argues that the realist na-
                                                 
3 
In the classification of the works of Robin and Doubrovsky as postmodern a 
note of caution must be sounded. Many of the characteristics that are fre-
quently argued to be typically postmodern may also be claimed to be typically 
Jewish. Clara Lévy, for example, sees the experiences of exile, dispossession 
and the search for identity as particularly typical of French Jewish writers af-
ter the Second World War (Lévy 1984). In addition, the preoccupation with 
the breakdown of the metanarrative of History, as well as the quest for places 
of belonging that pervade the works of both Robin and Doubrovsky could be 
argued to be the result of the extreme disruption caused to Jewish communi-
ties during the Holocaust rather than to some general sense of malaise affect-
ing the Western world. The elision of experiences that are specifically or typi-
cally Jewish within the category of that which is said to be postmodern cer-
tainly does not seem to be desirable. Indeed, the substantial criticisms follow-
ing Adorno’s assertion that the Jew and Auschwitz can be seen as emblematic 
of the late twentieth century experience illuminate the undesirability of such 
conflation (see Silverman, Facing Postmodernity, 1999). Robin’s theoretical 
writing is particularly helpful in shedding light upon these issues. In Le Golem 
de l’écriture (1997), Robin indicates that she sees postmodernism and Jewish-
ness as interdependent rather than separate. This view is reinforced in Papiers 
perdus, in a passage entitled ‘Judéïté’, in which the narrative focuses on what 
it means to be Jewish. Robin’s narrator tells us that she is not a believer but 
that she still feels Jewish. This affiliation, we are told, consists of the opposite 
of ‘une identité pleine’. It is, rather, ‘une appartenance particulariste: une 
identité rhizome par opposition à une identité racines; peut-être une identité de 
la post-judéité. Une judéité sans centre et sans périphérie, sans centre et sans 
diaspora, tout étant devenu diasporique’ (PP, ‘judéïté’). The interdependency, 
rather than opposition, of Jewishness and postmodernism is, again, clear.

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
262 
ture of Guibert’s AIDS writing disqualifies it from being considered 
postmodern (Schehr cited in Boulé 2001: 529). Indeed, from the dis-
cussion above, it seems that Guibert’s life writing texts seem to be less 
clearly in tune with postmodernism in terms of their treatment of lan-
guage and the unconscious, and the plurality of subjectivity than those 
of either Doubrovsky or Robin. I wish to contend, however, that none 
of these arguments entirely precludes Guibert’s writing from being 
considered postmodern. As my discussion in chapter 2 revealed, the 
argument advanced by both Hillenaar and Schehr that Guibert’s work 
offers a realist representation in which the author attempts to unveil 
the truth of his selfhood, is deeply questionable. As Jean-Pierre Boulé 
explains, whilst the narrator may profess to tell the truth, in fact ‘il la 
maquille, la pipe, la transforme à travers le prisme de la fiction’ (Bou-
lé 1997a: 32). Constructing deception and the disjuncture between ap-
pearance and reality as a major intratextual theme, Guibert’s narrator 
seems to unsettle any assumptions we may make of his own identity 
or that of the world around him. In many ways, the world of multi-
layered and multi-faceted deception that Guibert depicts seems to be 
emblematic of postmodernism.4 Moreover, Worton’s suggestion that 
Guibert’s autofictionally professed aim of ‘dévoilement de soi’ is a 
mere pretext ‘à remettre constamment en scène le sujet en procès qu’il 
est’ (Worton 1997: 70), is convincing. There are, in fact, numerous 
examples of the stability of the narrator’s identity being challenged,5 
and thus there is some adherence with the postmodern notion of a plu-
ral, shifting conception of selfhood. 
Perhaps most important of all, however, is the primacy of AIDS 
within Guibert’s life writing texts. As Jeffrey Weeks’ (1991) essay 
‘Postmodern AIDS’ demonstrates, the postmodern is often evoked in 
attempts to theorize the AIDS epidemic. As Weeks explains, the close 
association of postmodernism with this syndrome is partly the result 
of the apparent incurability of AIDS, which has seriously undermined 
                                                 
4 
As Martine Antle argues, Guibert’s textual representation of the art world is 
particularly dominated by the theme of deception. She asserts that ‘in this uni-
verse of the fake, where artists have their work signed by forgers and assure 
for themselves the falsification of their work, the authenticity of art and of in-
formation is put into question. From this moment on, we are in the universe of 
simulation and the simulacrum’ (Antle 1997: 191). 
5 
There is, for instance, ambiguity as to whether the autofictional Guibert ever 
received the Mockney vaccine (see Le PC: 186-187; ALA: 195; 268).

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
263 
Modernist beliefs in ‘the triumph of technology over the uncontrolla-
ble whims of nature’ (Weeks 1991: 115). Throwing doubt on notions 
of progress and technological improvement, AIDS can also be seen to 
correspond with postmodernism in its disrespect for the laws of or-
derly representation and hierarchy. Lee Edelman argues that 
 
All who are interested in writing and “AIDS” – interested that is in 
how those two terms interrogate, reflect, and displace one another in 
the discourses through which “AIDS” is constructed – have reason to 
take seriously this recurrent conjunction of “AIDS” and postmodern-
ism, to read it as gesturing toward a cultural logic centrally at stake in 
the conflict being waged over “AIDS” and “representation”. (Edelman 
1988: 12) 
 
Edelman goes on to argue that both AIDS and postmodernism are in-
extricably bound up with prevailing contemporary issues such as the 
death of the subject and the decline of faith in rational, transparent 
representation. In many ways, then, it seems justified to retain the no-
tion of postmodernism when discussing Guibert’s life writing texts, 
albeit whilst recognising that the postmodern traits that these works 
display are different to those of Robin and Doubrovsky’s texts. 
In fact, the differences between the works of these three authors 
should not be seen to undermine their classification as postmodern. As 
I argued in chapter 1, what is important about postmodernism is not to 
be found in any consistency that the notion may or may not have, but 
rather in its desire to question everything. As Lucy tells us, postmod-
ern literature is typified by a constant search for the rules by which to 
define itself (Lucy 1997: 65-66). Similarly, Magnan and Morin (1997: 
24) suggest that the postmodern literary project may be summed up as 
a perpetual impulse to question and unsettle, in which ‘tout est remis 
en question’.6 Indeed, this brief discussion suggests that in many ways 
the life writings of Doubrovsky, Guibert and Robin do display many 
of the family characteristics of postmodern literature. The work of 
each author, for example, is marked by a will to blur and twist some of 
the basic categories that structure literature and its relationship with 
                                                 
6 
They go on to argue that perhaps one of the most effective ways of fore-
grounding the importance of questioning everything in postmodern literature 
is for the narrative to be structured around an intratextual writer (Magnan and 
Morin 1997: 24). In the works of all three of these authors, this is clearly the 
case.

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
264 
the external world. If the works of Robin and Doubrovsky could be 
said to be more typical of the postmodern in their treatment and use of 
language than those of Guibert, then the latter’s relationship with post-
modernism is reinforced by the primacy of AIDS, a phenomenon of-
ten theorised through a postmodern prism, within his texts. It seems 
then, that Sarkonak is far from mistaken in his claim that autofictional 
life writing is ‘[un] genre si représentatif de notre postmodernité et de 
cette triste fin de siècle’ (Sarkonak 1997b: 7). 
Having established the general compliance of these life writing 
projects with some of the theories and principles that underpin post-
modernism, I will now move on to examine the extent to which the 
works of each of these writers could be said to constitute a form of 
postmodern cartography. That is to say, to what extent do these works 
offer us a vision, or map, of the postmodern world, and to what extent 
do they serve as a form of guide that orientates the subject within the 
postmodern landscape? 
 
 
6.2 Doubrovsky and Postmodernism 
‘Doubrovsky’: A Postmodern Subject Moving 
 through Postmodern Spaces 
 
A number of areas of clear similarity between Doubrovsky’s autofic-
tional constructions of space and characteristics often identified to be 
postmodern are instantly evident. In particular, the spatial anxieties 
and omnipresent search for self and place that I have argued to be 
fundamental to the identity of the autofictional self constructed in 
Doubrovsky’s writings seem to be inherently postmodern. A key pre-
occupation of the postmodern period that I identified in Chapter 1, for 
example, is that of a growing search for identity, particularly in the 
form of a quest for home spaces and for spaces of belonging (Sarup 
1994: 18). As I have argued extensively, in the case of ‘Doubrovsky’, 
the search for ‘une place’ is fundamental to his identity. Not only are 
notions of ‘home’ and ‘belonging’ denaturalised in these life writing 
texts, but a number of archetypally postmodern ways of living in 
space are explored. For example, ‘Doubrovsky’ is presented as finding 
a stable identity in the transience of perpetually moving between the 
US and France. The parallel between this model of spatial identity that 
is anchored in movement and Clifford’s assertion that postmodern ex-

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
265 
perience is increasingly characterised by a transition from a focus on 
‘roots’ to one on ‘routes’, is clear.7 In addition, ‘Doubrovsky’’s loca-
tion between French and American cultures problematises the perva-
sive myth that the world is divided into bounded spaces, each occu-
pied by a ‘pure’ and ‘authentic’ culture. In Doubrovsky’s autofictions 
the world portrayed is one in which individuals are located at the 
complex intersections of culture, ethnicity and place, and the corre-
spondence with postmodern thought is clear. 
Moreover, the general sense of spatial and cultural disorienta-
tion that pervades Doubrovsky’s autofictional oeuvre can be seen to 
reflect the breakdown of metanarratives and over-arching belief sys-
tems that are also said to be typical of the postmodern world. In many 
ways, despite its status in former times as one of the fundamental and 
unproblematic organising features of life, space itself is presented in 
Doubrovsky’s works as problematic. In Fils, for example, it is pre-
sented as unknowable and alienating. We are told that ‘on tourne en 
rond à l’infini. On va nulle part. Rien où aller. […] Devient difficile 
de se perdre, puisqu’on peut pas arriver’(F: 88. My italics). This sense 
of disorientation and directionlessness is almost Beckettian in its tone 
of complete frustration and futility. Perhaps relating to Max Silver-
man’s equation of postmodernism with the ‘fragmentation of the 
“master plan”’ (1999: 74) that ordered modernity’s quest for unity 
and reason, ‘Doubrovsky’ wallows in a plural postmodern environ-
ment of movement and change that is unknowable and unpredictable. 
The results of the breakdown of over-arching metanarratives 
that organise the world and make it knowable are also to be found in 
‘Doubrovsky’’s small-scale movements through space. As I argued in 
chapter 4, ‘Doubrovsky’’s movements around Paris are often pre-
sented as motivated by the desire to regularly return to sites that are 
imbued with family memories and associations. Similarly, throughout 
the autofictional oeuvre, ‘Doubrovsky’ is depicted as making frequent 
trips either around France or the US during weekends and holidays, 
almost always accompanied by a female companion (UAS: 48-49). 
These trips are often portrayed as following a curious itinerary, moti-
vated by ‘Doubrovsky’’s desire to incorporate revisiting his past 
haunts and the former routes that he has followed into his new jour-
neys. By way of explanation for this we are told that ‘j’aime parfois 
                                                 
7 
See my discussion of James Clifford’s Routes in chapter 1.

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
266 
boucler mes boucles, croisement subit, inopiné carrefour, forment un 
nœud. Dans une vie décousue, si on repasse par certains points, ça fait 
une trame’ (UAS: 72). In a world of unsettled and uprooted identities, 
‘Doubrovsky’ feels that ‘il faut quelquefois se baigner dans le même 
fleuve’ (UAS: 138). This disorientated, dispossessed postmodern sub-
ject, then, abandons fixed, linear paths through the impersonal envi-
ronment in favour of the sense of security and familiarity offered by 
revisiting old haunts. He tells us that ‘on se retisse comme on peut, 
j’aime repasser par mes points, boucler mes boucles […] Faire la mê-
me chose, avec une autre. C’est différent, ça change. Dans la conti-
nuité’ (UAS: 149). A clear link here can be seen with the postmodern 
breakdown of the metanarrative of History. As Pierre Nora argues, the 
contemporary world is infused with a popular perception that the ac-
celeration of history risks erasing all that is familiar. As a result, Nora 
tells us that in order to replace ‘la mémoire spontanée’ that is increas-
ingly disappearing, we must work actively to ‘créer des archives’ 
(Nora 1984: XXIV). In ‘Doubrovsky’’s case, his spiralling, non-linear 
routes through space can be interpreted as a response to the uncertain-
ties of the postmodern world and as an attempt to use space in order to 
knot himself into the security of his memories and his past experi-
ences. 
It seems, then, that in many ways ‘Doubrovsky’’s relationship 
with space is presented as infused with postmodern characteristics. In 
addition to those characteristics that I have already identified, two par-
ticular motifs can be identified within Doubrovsky’s portrayal of 
space that reinforce its association with the postmodern. First, it is of 
great importance to note the prevalence of the theme of monstrosity 
within Doubrovsky’s work. Monsters and the notion of ‘monstrosity’ 
are recurring features of attempts to theorise the postmodern era.8 In 
relation to Doubrovsky, the theme of ‘monstrosity’ is of such deep 
significance that the author himself has claimed that it was by the title 
‘Le Monstre’ that he initially intended Fils to be known.9 Moreover, it 
is evident that notions of monstrousness are used within Doubrovsky’s 
autofictions in order to describe particular spaces. The city of New 
York, for instance, is described in Fils as ‘la Bête de Béton’ (F: 121) 
                                                 
8 
For a discussion of the ‘monstrous’ nature of postmodern bodies see Dear 
(1997). 
9 
For a discussion of monstrosity in Doubrovsky’s work see Ireland (1993: 2).

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
267 
and ‘le Béhémoth de Bitume [qui] me happe […] Manhattan m’attend 
monstre m’épie m’horripile’ (F: 121). Not only is this space presented 
as imbued with the typically postmodern trait of monstrosity, but it is 
also an example of the interdependency of body and space identified 
by those such as Elizabeth Grosz and Pile and Thrift to be characteris-
tic of postmodernism (Grosz 1998: 42-51; Pile and Thrift 1995a: 21). 
Just as I argued in chapter 4 that ‘Doubrovsky’’s body is at times pre-
sented as caught up in a relationship of interdependency with the 
space of Paris to the extent that it is implied that the future of both is 
the same, there is great synchronicity between ‘Doubrovsky’ and the 
city of New York. Like Paris, this city is often presented within Dou-
brovsky’s texts in personified, corporeal terms. It is described, for ins-
tance, as ‘le nombril de Manhattan’(F: 93) and ‘Broadway, une artère 
qui éructe, […], aux entrailles des avenues’(F: 301). So close is the re-
lationship between this city and ‘Doubrovsky’’s own body that they 
do not merely mirror each other’s monstrosity, but the boundaries be-
tween body and surroundings blur into a slippery coagulation of the 
unsanitary and diseased. We are told, for example, that 
 
On pue en chœur on pète en commun on pisse en public on chie en-
semble c’est le vomi collectif collecte pas encore faite ordures humi-
des […] tous les résidus de la tripe dans les intestins de la ville au la-
byrinthe des boyaux du duodénum au côlon du caecum. (F: 300) 
 
Dialoguing with the description of the city of New York as a living 
body filled with stinking, rotting rubbish, ‘Doubrovsky’’s own body 
becomes ‘une ordure déambulant entre les poubelles immobiles’ and 
he says of himself: ‘mes immondices se déversent dans le caniveau, je 
suis un déchet […] Dès pieds à la tête, je me vomis’ (UAS: 172). The 
mutually constitutive nature of the body-space relationship that is in-
creasingly a focus of postmodern geography (Nast 1998: 109), is, 
then, highly evident in Doubrovsky’s autofictional œuvre and both 
body and space are portrayed with irrefutably ‘monstrous’, postmod-
ern characteristics. 
The second spatial symbol that recurs across Doubrovsky’s 
autofictional writings, and which is often argued by spatial theorists to 
be emblematically postmodern, is that of the labyrinth. The symbol of 
the labyrinth is particularly prevalent in Doubrovsky’s autofictional 
writings, being used variously to depict the city; the built environment 
of Queens; Rachel’s childhood memories; the tragedies of ‘Elle’s life;

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
268 
anal sex; and the female body, as well as more general experiences of 
being lost (UAS: 71; UAS: 271; AV: 76; UAS: 71; AV: 204). The 
labyrinth does, then, pervade Doubrovsky’s writing to the extent that 
suggests it to be particularly significant in his autofictional double’s 
relationship with the world. Originating in Greek mythology, the laby-
rinth was said to house the half-human, half-bull Minotaur that had to 
be fed on the flesh of young men and women. Built by Daedalus, this 
maze-like creation was said to comprise so many winding passages 
that escape was impossible.10 It is for its maze-like, disorientating pro-
perties that the labyrinth has in recent times come to emblematise 
postmodern space. It is perhaps unsurprising that ‘Doubrovsky’, pre-
sented as he is as perpetually disorientated and disempowered by 
space, should be linked to the notion of the labyrinth. Indeed, just as in 
mythological terms the labyrinth was notoriously difficult to escape, 
so it is clear that ‘Doubrovsky’ is not presented as finding any simple 
way out of the confusion of postmodern space. Far from possessing a 
master plan that might provide an over-arching meaning system to al-
low him to situate himself in his surroundings, ‘Doubrovsky’ seems to 
devise his own postmodern ‘monster’ plan, in the form of his unusual 
France-US division, and his spiralling, circling movements through 
familiar environments. This is, however, a ‘monster’ plan that con-
fines him to dispossession and alienation in the disorientating spaces 
of his environment. The labyrinth is, therefore, a metaphor for a post-
modern environment that is senseless and disempowering for the sub-
ject who is unable to become entirely independent and reconcile him-
self with his own place in society and his own identity. 
It seems, then, that Doubrovsky’s autofictional œuvre is not 
only underpinned by some typically postmodern philosophies but that 
‘Doubrovsky’ is constructed as moving through some typically post-
modern spaces. If a key aspect of wayfinding is a ‘down on the 
ground’, lived experience as opposed to depictions of space that work 
through over-arching metanarratives that normalise the environment, 
then Doubrovsky’s autofiction is clearly pertinent. The spaces por-
trayed by Doubrovsky are personal, cultural and highly political: in 
short, they constitute the antithesis of a classic map. Moreover, far 
from depicting a fixed, unchanging ‘snapshot’ of the world at one par-
ticular moment in time, Doubrovsky’s autofictions draw a map of 
                                                 
10 
http://www.mythweb.com/encyc/.

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
269 
changing, non-linear space and subjectivity which are presented as 
evolving throughout the course of ‘Doubrovsky’’s life. In negotiating 
the boundaries between past and present selves, past and present lived 
experiences, Doubrovsky draws a changing, multilayered map. In 
these ways, then, it seems that Doubrovsky’s life writings could, in-
deed, be termed ‘postmodern cartography’. In order to add a further 
dimension to this argument, I will now examine to what extent Dou-
brovsky’s autofictions could be said to constitute a ‘guide’ that en-
ables the individual to better orientate himself in the postmodern 
world. 
 
 
Doubrovsky’s Autofictions as Postmodern Cartography? 
 
In this discussion I will address the ways in which Doubrovsky’s life 
writings could be said to constitute a guiding force both symbolically 
and geo-culturally. Due to the gap between the extratextual author and 
his intratextual self, it is clearly problematic to extrapolate from one to 
the other. I will therefore focus primarily upon what the texts reveal 
about the role of writing for the intratextual ‘Doubrovsky’. That is to 
say, to what extent does Doubrovsky present writing as a guiding 
force for his intratextual avatar? When there is sufficient evidence to 
draw conclusions about the role of writing for the extratextual Dou-
brovsky, this will be overtly signalled. In what ways, then, can Dou-
brovsky’s writing be said to constitute a form of guide or tool for ori-
entating the self in the postmodern world? 
The life-changing significance of writing for the intratextual 
‘Doubrovsky’ is clear. In Un Amour de soi, the intratextual writer 
claims that ‘depuis que je transforme ma vie en phrases, je me trouve 
intéressant. À mesure que je deviens le personnage de mon roman, je 
me passionne pour moi’ (UAS: 91). Whereas much conventional auto-
biographical writing is undertaken in order to record the stories of in-
dividuals who society judges to have led particularly interesting lives, 
‘Doubrovsky’ indicates that in his case, writing plays a much more ac-
tive role in constructing his sense of self. Stressing his perception that 
through writing he might continue his psychoanalysis, in Le Livre bri-
sé, ‘Doubrovsky’ argues that ‘l’autobiographie n’est pas un genre lit-
téraire, c’est un remède métaphysique’ (LLB: 255). Rather than 
merely writing in order to record the events of his life, then, it seems

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
270 
that for ‘Doubrovsky’ literary production represents an attempt to ex-
plore some of the deepest complexities of his innermost self. ‘Dou-
brovsky’’s argument that he could never write such a work in his sec-
ond language, English (AV: 31), suggests that writing constitutes a 
form of mapping the depths and extents of his inner self that he could 
never achieve in analysis due to both linguistic barriers and the pro-
hibitive cost that such an extensive project would entail. The corre-
spondence with Nora’s impulsion to ‘cartographier notre propre géo-
graphie mentale’ (Nora 1984: VII), is clear. The incremental progres-
sion and inscription of this exploration of the inner self, rather than 
constituting a totalising, fixed ‘snapshot’, is clearly in tune with the 
aims of postmodern ‘wayfinding’. 
The life-changing role of writing is reinforced in Le Livre brisé, 
when the intratextual ‘Doubrovsky’ claims that ‘mes écrits plaident 
ma cause’ (LLB: 66). Not only is writing the story of his life presented 
as a way in which ‘Doubrovsky’ can chart the depths of his inner self, 
but it is also presented as a method through which to renegotiate and 
re-map his relationship with others. Contravening Régine Robin’s ar-
gument that autobiographical writing is often undertaken in order to 
anticipate death (Robin 1993b: 73-86), ‘Doubrovsky’ makes it clear 
that it is his place in life not death that he is seeking to change. That is 
to say that rather than trying to guarantee that his achievements would 
be remembered and therefore that even posthumously he would have a 
certain place in the world, the concerns of ‘Doubrovsky’ are consid-
erably more immediate. In Le Livre brisé he asserts that ‘on m’attend. 
J’y ai ma place. Ma mort n’est pas un problème. Le problème, c’est 
ma vie’ (LLB: 228). This is reinforced in Laissé pour conte, in which 
we are told that ‘si on me lit, ça me relie […] écrire m’inscrit quelque 
part chez quelqu’un dans le siècle, toute petite, me donne une place, 
actuelle, virtuelle, imaginaire’ (LPC: 273). Writing is overtly hailed as 
a medium through which ‘Doubrovsky’ can re-negotiate his place in 
the world and find a sense of belonging, whether actual, virtual or 
imaginary. In this, the correspondence with the notion of ‘postmodern 
cartography’ is again clear. 
Perhaps most crucial here is the fact that the renegotiation of 
‘Doubrovsky’’s place that occurs through writing is situated partly 
upon the terrain of culture and is directly linked to the matter of spa-
tial belonging. That is to say that writing can be argued to be a me-
dium through which ‘Doubrovsky’ is presented as seeking to resolve

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
271 
the sense of spatial and cultural dispossession that unsettles his iden-
tity. As I argued in chapter 4, for instance, ‘Doubrovsky’ is presented 
as believing that literary success will bring with it the transcendence 
of ethnico-racial prejudice. He tells us that 
 
Les lettres sont des lettres de noblesse. Une activité éthérée, certes, 
mais qui vous naturalise. Un juif, lui, n’écrit pas vraiment pour se fai-
re un nom: il s’agit de le refaire. Il s’appelle Bergson, mais on ne s’en 
aperçoit plus. S’il devient suffisamment célèbre, le voilà enfin comme 
tout le monde. (LLB: 271)  
 
If spatial displacement and migration to the US are presented as ena-
bling ‘Doubrovsky’ to gain financial security, material comfort and an 
academic reputation, then it is important to note that it is primarily in 
France that he wishes the fruits of his literary achievements to be 
borne. In L’Après-vivre we are told that 
 
Le français est ma patrie. […] Mon unique fibre patriotique est hexa-
gonale. Comme mon écriture. Je n’ai jamais écrit une ligne en anglais. 
Aux États-Unis, j’ai perdu mon nom à coucher dehors. Mais mon 
nom, comme écrivain, je ne peux, ne veux le faire qu’en France. Je me 
suis même arrangé pour que ce que j’écris soit strictement intraduisi-
ble, inexportable. (AV: 31) 
 
It is not merely social status that ‘Doubrovsky’ seeks through literary 
acclaim, but the specific renegotiation of his stigmatised identity 
within the arena of French culture. Indeed, as I discussed in chapter 4, 
this strategy is presented as in some ways successful within Dou-
brovsky’s autofictions. Whilst writing cannot be said to iron out all the 
problematic aspects of ‘Doubrovsky’’s identity, it is presented as al-
lowing him to become accepted within French culture to the extent 
that he attains considerable recognition and, for instance, is invited 
onto celebrated French television programmes such as Apostrophes. In 
this way, then, writing could be argued to constitute a form of post-
modern cartography for ‘Doubrovsky’ as it is presented as the medium 
through which he can renegotiate his geo-cultural identity and re-map 
his place within ‘Frenchness’. 
Whilst Doubrovsky himself has remained reticent about the re-
lationship between his writing and his cultural identity, in a recent let-
ter to me, he referred to his ‘homelessness that seeks, beyond the ex-
perience of war-time Jewishness and peace-time geographic meander-

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
272 
ings, the ultimate grounding in (symbolic) Frenchness through writ-
ing’. He reinforced this assertion by referring to the effect of finding 
the word autofiction listed in the Larousse and Robert dictionaries, 
one of which attributed the word to ‘S.D, 1977’. He writes that ‘I felt I 
had finally settled home, become ‘French’ fully, since I even created a 
new accepted term in the French language’.11 
Overall, it seems that there is considerable evidence to suggest 
that Doubrovsky’s autofictions do constitute a form of postmodern 
cartography. The genre of autofiction is underpinned by a range of on-
tological tenets that are clearly in tune with postmodern thought. 
Moreover, the spaces portrayed within these works often display typi-
cally postmodern characteristics, and correspond with the incremental 
and down-on-the-ground notion of ‘way-finding’. Doubrovsky’s auto-
fictions could, then, be said to draw a map of the postmodern world. 
Finally, if the aim of postmodern cartography may be said to be the 
cognitive mapping of the environment in order to orientate the self 
and negotiate a stable identity within a fluctuating world, then it does 
seem that ‘Doubrovsky’ is presented as being anchored in the space of 
his life, both symbolically and geo-culturally, by writing. Perhaps 
even more tellingly, it seems that for Doubrovsky himself, writing 
these autofictions has provided him with an opportunity not only to 
map out and construct a version of his deeply problematic cultural 
identity, but it has allowed him to renegotiate his sense of geo-cultural 
belonging. Having established the compatibility of Doubrovsky’s 
autofictions with the notion of ‘postmodern cartography’, it is to a dis-
cussion of Robin’s literary works that I will now turn. 
 
 
6.3 Robin and Postmodernism 
Robin: Plural Identities and Heterogeneous Spaces 
 
In many ways, the spaces depicted within Robin’s texts do seem to 
display postmodern characteristics, and numerous parallels can be 
seen with the spaces of Doubrovsky’s autofictions. As my discussion 
in chapter 5 has shown, for example, the main characters in Robin’s 
texts are frequently shown to be uprooted, perhaps rootless, individu-
als. Like ‘Doubrovsky’, in fact, they often belie the typically post-
                                                 
11 
Serge Doubrovsky, personal correspondence dated March 30, 2003.

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
273 
modern characteristics of spatial and cultural disorientation. As I have 
already argued, Robin’s characters frequently express their sense of 
being lost in assertions such as: ‘ici ou ailleurs, je n’ai jamais été chez 
moi’ (Q: 178) and ‘je me perds, me dissipe, m’éparpille’ (IFP, ‘Jour-
nal’: 142). In La Québécoite, a typically postmodern experience of 
space underpins the narrative, as each of the three parallel scenarios is 
based around the story of a woman who emigrates to Quebec and tries 
to set up home there. Max Silverman’s assertion that the postmodern 
condition is plagued by exile, contingency and marginality (1999: 23), 
seems to correspond particularly well with this example of Robin’s 
writing. Not only do these characters remain on the margins of the so-
ciety that they migrate to, but any sense of belonging that they may es-
tablish in their country of arrival is shown to be provisional, as the 
characters ultimately return home. As I argued in chapter 5 and as I 
have argued in relation to ‘Doubrovsky’, the notion of ‘dwelling in 
travel’, as ‘routes’ replace ‘roots’ in grounding identities, seems par-
ticularly appropriate to describe the experiences of many of Robin’s 
characters. Certainly within La Québécoite and L’Immense Fatigue, 
rather than merely travelling between fixed places, the condition of 
movement itself is important to Robin’s protagonists and I have ar-
gued that it is in movement that they seek to establish a sense of be-
longing. The complex and fluid identities portrayed in Robin’s writ-
ings are clearly better served by the notion of ‘itineraries’ rather than 
single ‘home spaces’, and the link with postmodern space is clear. 
In fact, the complex identities of her characters is a striking fea-
ture of Robin’s writing, and one that is particularly relevant to the 
topic of postmodernism. It is particularly noteworthy that these char-
acters are often presented as not merely feeling disorientated and un-
settled in relation to their cultural belonging, but their identities are of-
ten presented as fundamentally plural and divided. I wish to contend 
here that these divisions are often portrayed as deeply entwined with 
spatial division. Far from implicating purely fictional characters in 
models of divided selfhood, the division of space and identity is most 
evident in Papiers perdus, the most obviously self-referential of 
Robin’s literary writings. For example, so strongly divided an individ-
ual is Robin’s intratextual self in the section of Papiers perdus entitled 
‘Le Cybercafé’, that not only are we told that she lives in two different 
places, Paris and Montreal, but that she takes to sending emails from 
one of her selves to the other. We are told:

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
274 
 
Soudain, l’illumination! C’est à moi que je dois envoyer des messa-
ges. Rivka A écrit à Régine Robin et réciproquement. Rivka A écrira 
quand elle sera à Paris et Régine Robin lui répondra quand elle sera à 
Montréal. (PP, ‘Le Cybercafé’) 
 
In this, division in space directly mirrors a divided character: Régine 
is a University lecturer in Montreal whereas Rivka is a writer in Paris. 
And it is the division in both character and space that provides the 
text’s reason for being, consisting as it does of an email dialogue be-
tween the two selves. This protagonist is clearly postmodern in her di-
vision and her plurality, a message that is reinforced when she is de-
scribed as ‘une addict de la communication’ (PP, ‘Le Cybercafé). A 
divided self, living in two different cities, speaking different lan-
guages and communicating with herself via email; a more inherently 
postmodern motif of selfhood would be difficult to imagine. 
The theme of plurality can also be identified in Robin’s literary 
writings on a larger scale. Like in Doubrovsky’s autofictions, Robin’s 
texts present a view of space that undermines the notion of discretely 
bounded spaces that are occupied by ‘pure’ and ‘authentic’ cultures. 
In fact, the topic of cultural plurality and mixing is addressed even 
more directly in Robin’s writings than in those of Doubrovsky. Rose-
mary Chapman’s argument that I cited in chapter 5, that space in 
Robin’s works is marked by a multiplicity of points of reference, is 
particularly relevant. Whereas in Doubrovsky’s autofictions, contact 
between different cultures seems to follow a bi-polar pattern of a 
dominant culture and a threatened culture, in Robin’s writings, the 
spaces portrayed are often filled with a wide range of different cul-
tures. As I have argued, for example, in La Québécoite, houses that 
are filled with a broad array of objects with different cultural origins 
play a significant role in the text. In the depiction of spaces that com-
prise a heterogeneous mix of peoples, cultures and languages, post-
modern theories of interculturalism and cosmopolitanism are clearly 
invoked. 
Postmodern characteristics are, then, clearly identifiable within 
Robin’s general portrayal of space. It is to the close reading of two 
particular urban spaces, spaces that are frequently associated with the 
postmodern, that I wish now to turn. Whilst the city of Paris is pre-
sented as a highly regulated and regulatory space in which cultural di-

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
275 
versity is downplayed, the contrary is true of the urban spaces of 
Montreal and New York in Robin’s work. These environments are 
posited as showcases for cultural plurality and other characteristic fea-
tures of postmodern space. In La Québécoite, for example, New York 
is shown to be infused with postmodern global culture. Praising this 
city as a comfortable ‘no man’s land’, the narrator tells us: 
 
Elle aimerait les hamburgers huileux avec relish, mustard sucrée et 
ketchup. Le tout arrosé d‘un coke. Dégueulasse – et le café dit régu-
lier: une espèce de lavasse teintée de café. Elle aimerait. Ce laisser-
aller, ce no man’s land serait son lieu. Elle se sentirait bien au milieu 
de cette foule obèse aux vêtements mal taillés, aux couleurs criardes. 
(Q: 65) 
 
By citing particular food types that are synonymous with transnational 
capital, Robin portrays New York as a place in which the interests of 
global capital play a significant role in influencing the shape of the 
heterogeneous cultural landscape. The parallel with the characteristics 
argued by Jameson to be typical of postmodernism that I discussed in 
chapter 1, is unambiguous. 
The city of Montreal is, perhaps, the ultimate motif of the post-
modern urban environment within Robin’s work. In fact, the role of 
Montreal within Robin’s works has elicited considerable scholarship 
in recent times. It is pertinent to note that many of the characteristics 
that critics identify in relation to Robin’s depiction of Montreal are 
clearly linked with notions of ‘postmodern space’. As I mentioned in 
chapter 5, Simon Harel, for example, argues that Montreal is remark-
able for its ‘porosité’ (1992: 401). He goes on to argue that 
 
Le Québec, société post-industrielle en continent nord-américain, se 
voit bon gré mal gré projeté au coeur d’un monde où la constitution 
interculturelle est une préoccupation constante. […] L’identité québé-
coise n’est pas la reconnaissance d’un destin stable et prévisible dont 
des citoyens autochtones seraient les légataires, mais plutôt une struc-
ture ouverte. (Harel 1992: 375) 
 
According to Harel, then, the multicultural space of Montreal may 
evoke a radical questioning of notions of singular, unified selfhood. It 
is clear, then, that the space of Montreal, characterised by cultural plu-
rality, the questioning of singular identity and a sense of ‘in-between-
ness’ is not only imbued with postmodern traits, but is deeply com-

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
276 
patible with many of the postmodern qualities that mark Robin’s char-
acters. 
Indeed, inherently plural and a site of cultural heterogeneity, 
Montreal is also, I wish to contend, imbued with the postmodern char-
acteristics of being unknowable and somewhat unpredictable. In L’Im-
mense Fatigue, for example, in one story in which the protagonist is 
searching for the mother who he believed had died during the war but 
who he now believes to be alive, the city is cast as holding the key to 
all the mysteries that he wishes to unravel. We are told that with few 
addresses from which to begin his search, ‘il arpenta longuement la 
rue Sherbrooke, soucieux de tout voir, tout observer’ (IFP: 102). Over 
the course of the story, the main character gradually deepens his 
knowledge of the city as if to suggest that in unpicking the details of 
this complex urban landscape he may discover the truth about his own 
family background, too. In contrast to traditional notions of ‘space’ as 
a fixed entity that exploration and mapping may make entirely know-
able and familiar, this postmodern metropolis remains unknowable 
except in fragments and sections. Its shifting complexities seem to be 
beyond any quest for total mastery or knowledge. In this, as in 
Robin’s other literary works, the texts are filled with lists and poetic 
verses rather than the plenitude of ‘whole’ narratives or conventional 
maps in order to depict the fragmented experience of the cityscape. It 
seems, then, incontrovertible that Robin’s presentation of the urban 
environment of Montreal is that of a city that is plural and diverse, 
shifting and complex, and which defies any attempt at total knowledge 
and transparency. Intriguing and yet unknowable, then, all of these 
features point indubitably to the appellation ‘postmodern’. 
However, a note of caution must be sounded. There is some evi-
dence to suggest that the space of Quebec, and hence that of Montreal, 
is marked by postcolonial rather than postmodern struggle. Indeed, it 
seems that many features of Robin’s textual constructions of space 
may be traced back to the particular, late twentieth century situation in 
Quebec’s struggle for independence. Pierre Nepveu tells us that, fol-
lowing the unsuccessful referendum on independence, the 1980s was a 
decade marked by a feeling of ‘non-identité’ (Nepveu 1999: 183). 
Whist this may frequently be identified as a classically postmodern 
trait, in this case it was clearly attributed to a specific postcolonial 
struggle rather than to the general conditions of postmodernism. Sark-
onak argues that, for the same reason, this period in Quebec was

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
277 
marked by feelings of ‘défiguration, dépaysement. Question du lieu, 
question de l’être, question de la mémoire’ (Nepveu 1999: 183). These 
characteristics, highly evident in Robin’s writings, are at once typical 
of the general postmodern condition, and yet are the product of a spe-
cific political and historical struggle. The experience of Québécité, 
then, already traditionally based upon notions of exile and the quest 
for identity, was further disorientated in the 1980s and 1990s, and thus 
delimiting the extent to which postmodernism is present within this 
space, is somewhat problematic. It would seem, however, that whether 
caused by postcolonialism or by the wider forces of globalisation, 
Robin’s texts do depict a wide array of spaces that are imbued with 
largely postmodern characteristics. 
Overall, postmodern traits do seem to be identifiable in many 
aspects of Robin’s oeuvre. These are present in the divided identities 
of her protagonists, as well as the authorial philosophies underlying 
her writing. Many of the spaces in which the protagonists of Robin’s 
texts move do seem to be imbued with postmodern characteristics and 
so it is pertinent now to ask, to what extent might these literary writ-
ings be considered to constitute a form of postmodern cartography? 
 
 
Robin’s Life Writing as Postmodern Cartography? 
 
As I have previously discussed, postmodern cartography refers to the 
way in which writing may constitute a manner of mapping out and 
making sense of a particular selfhood and therefore finding new routes 
through the postmodern landscape for particular individuals. In order 
to establish whether the literary texts that I have examined in this 
study constitute a form of postmodern cartography, it is necessary to 
establish how important Robin presents writing to be and whether 
writing could be said to constitute a form of ‘wayfinding’ through the 
postmodern environment. 
In many ways within Robin’s texts, literature is posited as an 
invaluable resource for protagonists. In ‘Mère Perdue sur le world 
wide web’ in L’Immense Fatigue, for example, the protagonist’s 
search for his mother is purported only to have occurred because he 
found a reference to her in a book. We are told that after ‘le trou noir 
de la guerre’ into which his mother disappeared, the site of ‘sa réap-
parition [était] dans un livre’ (IFP: 118). Moreover, it is the discovery

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
278 
of her library records and details of the books that she has borrowed 
that convinces the protagonist that his mother did, in fact, survive the 
war (IFP: 111). Writing is shown to be similarly important in ‘Journal 
de déglingue entre le Select et Compuserve’, when the protagonist in-
dicates that ‘je ne me sens pas véritablement exister que par le journal’ 
(IFP: 141). Books and writing, then, are constructed in Robin’s liter-
ary works as sites of truth. More than this, they also seem to constitute 
a form of home space within Robin’s writing. For example, also in 
‘Mère perdue sur le world wide web’, the protagonist is presented as 
becoming nostalgic about his home in Paris. We are told: 
 
Il s’imaginait assis à son bureau à Paris, entouré d’un amoncellement 
de livres […]. Là aussi il était bien quand lui venaient une phrase, une 
idée, un mot, une image. C’était là son chez-soi dans les mots, les 
feuilles de papier, l’ordinateur et les dictionnaires. (IFP, ‘Mère perdue 
sur le world wide web’: 121) 
 
For this restless protagonist, then, rather than identifying with the 
space of Paris, it is in the world of words, paper, computers and dic-
tionaries that he feels at home. A little later in this work, in the short 
story entitled ‘Manhattan Bistro’, this notion of the text as home is re-
peated. Rather than providing a space of belonging for the protago-
nists themselves, however, it is the protagonist’s dead family who are 
to be laid to rest in a text. We are told: ‘est-ce bien une façon d’opérer 
dans l’écriture un début de travail du deuil? De me libérer de ces 
morts en leur assignant enfin une place, une plaque, un nom et un pré-
nom?’ It is clearly implied that writing would provide a final home 
space in which the weight of those relatives, murdered during the 
Holocaust, could be laid to rest. 
Moreover, in many ways, writing seems to be constructed as a 
coping strategy that helps characters respond to particular spaces that 
they encounter. Dawn Thompson argues in her review of The Wan-
derer, the English language version of La Québécoite, that the endless 
lists that fill Robin’s narratives represent ‘the protagonists’ attempts to 
map the city, to fix it in memory’ (Thompson 2001: 168). This is 
clearly very close to the definition of postmodern cartography that I 
advanced in chapter 1. Furthermore, it is of paramount importance to 
note that in Papiers perdus, the work that I have argued to be the most 
strongly autobiographically referential of any of these works, a similar

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
279 
view of the interdependency of writing and space is expressed. Ro-
bin’s intratextual self tells us: 
 
Je rêve d’un journal qui me ressemblerait. Un fourre-tout mais dans 
lequel on se repèrerait malgré tout, qui consignerait à la fois les rêves, 
les rêvasseries, les fantasmes, les projets, les réflexions, les citations, 
les remarques de lecture. Le tout comme un collage sans ordre mais 
on ne s’y perdrait pas pour autant; pas tout à fait. On se baladerait 
dans sa vie comme dans la ville. […] la vie comme une déambulation 
urbaine. (PP, ‘Fourre-tout’) 
 
It seems that in this vision of an ideal diary, the perfect text would 
comprise a mirror image of the spaces in which individuals move. A 
high degree of interdependency is evident between text and individual, 
then, and writing and books are cast as of life-changing significance 
for many of the protagonists of Robin’s literary works. 
Whilst the ambiguous generic status of Robin’s works makes it 
problematic to extrapolate from the texts to the author, Alexandra 
Lavastine-Laignel goes so far as to suggest that it is not just Robin’s 
textual avatars who adopt writing as a coping strategy to deal with 
their spatial identity. She identifies ‘[une] quête de soi’ in Robin’s 
works that she attributes to the writer’s complex cultural identity. She 
claims that Robin’s identity is marked by ‘[des] appartenances multi-
ples’ and she goes on to explain: 
 
écrivain français? Montréalais? Écrivain juif français, juif québécois? 
Questions insolubles. Ecrire, n’est-ce pas, pour Régine Robin, entrer 
en débat avec ses diverses identités?’ (Lavastine-Laignel 1999: 7)  
 
In this, then, the implication is clear: it is the complex cultural and 
ethnic identity of the author that provides the motivation for writing. 
Simon Harel sheds important light upon this topic in his analysis of 
the role of writing for those who have undergone the experience of 
emigration. He tells us: ‘je suggère à cet égard que l’écriture permet la 
création d’une territorialité imaginaire qui a de fortes connotations en-
dopsychiques’ (Harel 1992 : 398). Harel draws upon the work of psy-
choanalyst Winnicott, who asserts that, uprooted from their culture of 
origin, immigrants often require an ‘espace du potentiel’ that acts as a 
kind of second skin or buffer zone to protect against the threats of the 
outside world. Harel proposes that writing may in fact constitute this 
very ‘espace du potentiel’ for many immigrant writers.

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
280 
For Robin, however, it seems that it is not merely the threat of 
moving to an unknown country that moves her to write, but rather her 
loss of faith in the capacity of History to deal with the tragedies of the 
Holocaust and her family history. In ‘Le Sujet de l’écriture’, for 
example, Robin tells us: 
 
L’écriture serait trajet, parcours, cette objectivation qui viendrait à 
tout instant rappeler qu’il y a de la perte, qu’on n’écrit que dans cette 
perte, que rien ne viendra combler le manque, mais que l’acte d’écrire, 
l’impossibilité d’écrire dans l’écriture même est la tentative toujours 
déçue et toujours recommencée de déjouer la perte, de l’apprivoiser, 
de la mettre à distance; la tentative de saturer, de suturer tout en sa-
chant que l’on ne peut y arriver. (Robin 1995b: 99-100) 
 
Writing, then, is cast as a strategy to deal with the horrific losses that 
Robin, and those like her, suffered in the past, and which linger in the 
confusion of the postmodern environment. This notion is reinforced in 
Robin’s explanation about the work that would become L’Immense 
Fatigue which she describes as ‘une pseudo-généalogie familiale, un 
hommage aux disparus en même temps qu’une traversée du siècle’. 
She attributes her desire to keep returning to this text as due to 
 
sans doute un besoin de traces étant donné qu’il ne reste plus rien, […] 
sans doute aussi un besoin de transmission à ma fille de ces menues 
traces généalogiques à partir desquelles elle-même pourra se recom-
poser un passé et une mémoire familiale. Savoir que la vérité du sujet 
ne se donnera pas dans l’écriture, mais ne pouvoir faire autrement que 
de courir après cette vérité dans l’écriture. (Robin 1995b: 112) 
 
Whilst not believing that in writing all will be resolved, Robin does 
suggest that writing is the only possible site of inscription for the most 
problematic aspects of her own identity. In an assertion that demon-
strates most overtly her compatibility with the underlying motivation 
of postmodern cartography, Robin tells us in ‘Le sujet de l’écriture’ 
that living as we are in ‘un monde borgesien où tout reboucle sur soi-
même, un labyrinthe, une énigme […]’ (Robin 1995b: 113) it is only 
through writing, and psychoanalysis, that the individual can cope. 
In sum, it is clear that many aspects of Robin’s work comply 
with the notion of ‘postmodernism’. From the ontological and literary 
premises underlying her writing to the spaces in which her protago-
nists move, the postmodern is almost omnipresent in Robin’s literary

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
281 
writings. Whilst the complex generic status of the works focused upon 
in this study makes it difficult to draw conclusions about Robin’s wri-
terly motivations, there is evidence to suggest that these works do, in 
some ways, constitute a form of postmodern cartography. Having dis-
cussed the works of Robin and Doubrovsky, it is to those of Guibert 
that I will now turn. 
 
 
6.4 Guibert and Postmodernism 
‘Guibert’: Labyrinthine, Monstrous and Dysfunctional Space 
 
In chapter 3, my discussion focused greatly upon spaces that are pre-
sented within Guibert’s work as exerting control over and ‘disciplin-
ing’ the person with AIDS’ body. Whilst this desire to control seems 
to indicate a belief in metanarratives and over-arching discourses that 
seek to organise society, it would be erroneous to suggest that the 
spaces portrayed in Guibert’s autofictions are free of postmodern cha-
racteristics. Indeed, even Paris, a space that is presented in the works 
of both Doubrovsky and Robin as far from postmodern, is imbued 
with some postmodern characteristics in Guibert’s work. As I argued 
in chapter 3, for instance, a tone of disjuncture and breakdown in the 
logic of the city sometimes infuses Guibert’s depiction of Paris. Once 
his illness is confirmed, the space of Paris is often presented as just as 
equally dysfunctional as ‘Guibert’’s own ailing body, being paralyzed 
by transport and postal strikes (ALA: 51). Moreover, as I have already 
argued, once diagnosed as HIV positive, ‘Guibert’’s experience of this 
city is increasingly one of spaces that are both geographically periph-
eral and culturally marginal. L’hôpital Claude-Bernard, for example, 
is described as ‘[un] hôpital mort’ (ALA: 55) and ‘un hôpital fantôme 
au bout du monde’ (ALA: 53). Even in the space of Paris, then, a city 
that is presented by Robin and Guibert as part of the Old World, 
within Guibert’s work some postmodern characteristics are evident. 
Perhaps the strongest association of Guibert’s AIDS texts with notions 
of ‘postmodern space’, however, is to be found in two recurring spa-
tial leitmotifs. The themes of labyrinthine space and monstrous space 
that I identified within Doubrovsky’s work as suggesting a particu-
larly strong connection with postmodern space are also present within 
Guibert’s life writing. It is to these two themes that my discussion will 
turn first.

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
282 
The figure of the labyrinth reappears across Guibert’s corpus. In 
an oft-cited passage, for instance, we are told that 
 
Avant l’apparition du sida, un inventeur de jeux électroniques avait 
dessiné la progression du sida dans le sang. Sur l’écran du jeu pour 
adolescents, le sang était un labyrinthe dans lequel circulait le Pac-
man, un shadok jaune actionné par une manette, qui bouffait tout sur 
son passage. (ALA: 13) 
 
In this case, the spatial allegory of the labyrinth is used to denote the 
narrator’s body, traversed as it is by a complex network of interlinking 
veins through which the HIV virus battles its way. Considerably later 
in the autofictional œuvre, the labyrinth is again mentioned, this time 
in order to denote the complex basement of the narrator’s block of 
flats. Just before getting locked into his own cellar, the narrator tells 
us: ‘j’avais recherché la porte en métal dans le labyrinthe, la seule por-
te de la cave où n’était inscrit aucun numéro, une porte de fait totale-
ment dissimulée’ (Le PC: 80). The use of the labyrinth to denote dis-
orientating, entrapping space is clear. Whilst locked into the cave, this 
allegory recurs when, envisaging his helplessness, the intra-textual 
Guibert tells us: 
 
Alors je me vis réellement, découvert des mois après, crevé dans cette 
cave, de soif, de faim, de froid et d’épuisement nerveux, comme les 
écoliers de la Villa Médicis, squelette recroquevillé sous des cartons. 
(Le PC: 83) 
 
As I argued in chapter 3, the cellar incident causes the narrator to feel 
that his destiny is out of his control and is associated with the loss of 
autonomy that he experiences in the medical environment. The spatial 
leitmotif of the labyrinth, then, clearly indicates a postmodern sense of 
disempowerment and disorientation. 
Indeed, medical spaces are constructed as particularly labyrin-
thine within Guibert’s AIDS texts. The hôpital Claude-Bernard, for 
example, disused other than for AIDS patients and made knowable by 
no reception service or porters, is marked only by a series of arrows 
indicating the route patients should take. The narrator tells us: ‘malgré 
tout mes efforts pour ne pas me perdre en suivant le parcours fléché, je 
m’aperçus bientôt que j’arrivais devant une sortie condamné’ (ALA: 
59). In this, the narrator is disorientated and confused by this unknow-
able, institutional space, as well as robbed of a feeling of control over

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
283 
his own being, sentiments indicative of the postmodern condition. 
Perhaps most tellingly, in Le Paradis, the narrator directly links the 
spatial trope of the labyrinth with the medical and institutional repos-
session of Jayne’s entire body after her death. He tells us: ‘ce qui res-
tait de son corps avait déjà été aspiré dans le labyrinthe médical’ (le P: 
109). For Guibert, overt textual references to the labyrinth indicate the 
pervasive inter-imbrication of the body, the medical establishment and 
even familiar spaces, and the typically postmodern feelings of disori-
entation and loss of autonomy that he feels in all three. 
The autofictional works that I discussed in chapter 3 are further 
pervaded by the figure of the monster, the archetypally postmodern 
nature of which I discussed in relation to Doubrovsky. Perhaps most 
remarkably, as I have already argued, one of the main places in which 
Guibert’s increasingly monstrous intratextual avatar finds a homely 
space is in the unknown city of Tangiers. Despite never having visited 
this place before, the narrator finds a terrace, sitting upon which he 
feels at home. This feeling is attributed to the other people occupying 
the terrace, amongst whom the narrator feels he belongs: 
 
Je m’assis parmi eux, sur cette terrasse que je reconnnus immédiate-
ment comme un endroit familier, m’appartenant déjà au même titre 
qu’à ses autres occupants qui ne semblaient même pas remarquer ma 
présence, un lieu totalement en accord avec ce temps si curieux […] 
d’une fin de vie. Je remarquai que ma terrasse était également fré-
quentée par des monstres, des boiteux, des unijambistes […] et cela 
m’allait bien de me retrouver parmi eux, moi aussi j’étais un monstre. 
(Le PC: 239)  
 
Indeed, reinforcing the notion that the key to understanding Guibert’s 
autofictional construction of corporeality is in its situated, spatial in-
terdependence, it is of paramount importance to note the geo-political 
significance of the site of this terrace. Expelled from the heart of 
French space and resisting his loss of autonomy through his use of 
space, the narrator finds a new home space in the colonially abjected 
Other of North Africa. Outside the reach of colonial regulation yet still 
highly visible within the French geo-cultural imaginary, Tangiers con-
stitutes a space divorced from modernist ideals of progress and perfec-
tion. Temporarily freed from his disorientation and the power struggle 
seeking to discipline or eject his non-conformist body from the heart 
of Frenchness, the ailing autofictional Guibert finds a place of com-

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
284 
fortable acceptance amongst the monsters of this North African ter-
race. 
In fact, it is pertinent here to cite a definition of the term ‘mon-
ster’ as proffered by John Ireland. In a piece entitled ‘Monstrous Writ-
ing’, Ireland tells us that the monster can be defined as ‘contrary to na-
ture’. He goes on to explain that ‘nature, of course, is what establishes 
genus which provides in turn the boundaries that permit classification’ 
(Ireland 1993: 3). The link between monstrosity and nature is, then, 
clear. Brad Epps asserts that ‘les derniers ouvrages de Guibert con-
tiennent peu d’images de la nature «sauvage». Ce sont les intérieurs 
qui dominent’ (Epps 1997: 47, footnote 11). Whilst it is probably true 
that with the exception of the North African beach that ‘Hervé Gui-
bert’ visits in Le Protocole compassionnel, there are few images of 
unfettered, natural landscapes, we must dispute the implication that 
nature is absent from Guibert’s work. Indeed, demonstrating the inter-
dependence of monstrosity, the feeling of loss of autonomy and a fail-
ure to conform to French rational ideals, ‘Guibert’ increasingly de-
scribes his helplessness in animalistic terms. He calls himself ‘un élé-
phant ligoté’ (Le PC: 13); ‘une baleine échouée et saignée à blanc’ (Le 
PC: 64) and ‘un scarabée retourné sur sa carapace’ (Le PC: 174 and 
HCR: 80). Moreover, ‘Guibert’ seems not only to depict himself as 
reduced to an animalistic level of helplessness, but seeks recourse to 
the animal kingdom itself in an attempt to demonstrate the postmodern 
dysfunctional nature of even that which is most natural. Indicating the 
disruption of the normal hierarchy, the narrator describes a series of 
animals, complete with their eating habits and their place in the food 
chain. He concludes: 
 
l’homme mange des animaux, des agneaux, des cochons de lait, des 
entrailles, des cervelles, des reins et des rognons blancs, des cœurs, 
des poulpes, des batraciens frits, des organismes palpitants, des huîtres 
crues. Le sida, microscopique et virulent, mange l’homme, ce géant. 
(Le PC: 180) 
 
Monstrous and animalistic, then, the fundamental structures that or-
ganise society and space are constructed as eroded and chaotic in 
Guibert’s autofictions, elements that clearly comply with the notion of 
‘postmodernism’. 
In addition to the characterisation of spaces as either labyrin-
thine or monstrous, two traits typical of postmodern space, there is

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
285 
evidence to suggest that the intratextual ‘Guibert’’s movements 
around space are compatible with the postmodern notion of ‘way-
finding’. ‘Guibert’’s method of art collecting that I discussed in sec-
tion 3.2, for example, seems to chime with the down-on-the-ground, 
non-totalising nature of this type of moving through space. For in-
stance, we are told that rather than going directly to known art ven-
dors, ‘Guibert’ buys paintings from shops discovered by chance 
thanks to the complex weaving through the urban landscape of the 
public buses on which he travels. Emphasising the instinctive, non-
prescribed nature of this activity, the narrator tells us: ‘j’étais assis 
dans l’autobus, je regardais la rue par le vitre, et soudain j’apercevais 
dans l’arrière-fond obscur désir. Je le reconnaissais comme un objet 
familier, une possession de toujours’ (HCR: 26-27). Rejecting the 
static, depersonalised maps of modernism, the narrator engages in a 
‘down on the ground’ method of ‘wayfinding’, thus engaging in a 
postmodern experience of space. 
It may be surmised, then, that the autofictional Guibert does, in 
some ways, seem to move through spaces that might be characterised 
as postmodern. Whilst the issues of interculturalism and global culture 
that feature in the works of Robin and Doubrovsky are not evident 
within Guibert’s autofictions, his works do effectively convey a vision 
of dysfunctional, senseless space, as well as notions of ‘labyrinthine’ 
and ‘monstrous’ space. My discussion will now turn to an examina-
tion of the ways in which Guibert’s autofictional project could be seen 
to constitute a form of guide through which the self can be better ori-
entated in the postmodern world. 
 
 
Guibert’s Autofictions as Postmodern Cartography? 
 
If postmodern cartography may be understood in short as the way in 
which writing constitutes a manner of mapping out and making sense 
of a particular selfhood and therefore finding new routes through the 
postmodern landscape, then there seem to be many examples of this in 
relation to Guibert’s work. Certainly, the life-changing significance of 
writing for both the extra and the intratextual Guibert cannot be un-
derestimated. Intratextually, writing is constructed as both psycho-
logically bound up with the narrator’s ability to carry on living and as

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
286 
wielding considerable effect on the way in which he lives this life. As 
Robinson argues: 
 
In both A l’ami […] and Le Protocole compassionnel, the body of the 
writer becomes identified with the body of the text […] the writing of 
the text is a dual writing of the writer and of that which is destroying 
him. Guibert’s perception of the future of his condition and of his 
book are parallel. (Robinson 1995: 135) 
 
Indeed, Guibert’s narrator overtly signals the choice that he makes be-
tween committing suicide and beginning another book. As Leslie Hill 
argues, for Guibert ‘écrire, c’est donc survivre’ (Hill 1995: 93). Writ-
ing, then, is what maintains, at least the intratextual Guibert, alive, 
thereby constituting the basic element for any experience of the post-
modern world. Moreover, not merely maintaining the narrator within 
the world, writing can also be seen to alter the paths that the narrator 
traces through the world and the life that he lives. Extratextually, there 
is evidence to suggest that writing played an equally important role in 
the life of the authorial Guibert as it is presented as doing in that of his 
narratively constructed self. In an interview with Jérome Garcin, for 
example, the authorial Guibert explained his battle to continue writing 
until the end with the words: ‘c’est encore une tentative par le récit 
d’évacuer le sida, de m’en débarrasser’ (cited in Boulé 1997a). In this 
way, the authorial Guibert seems to suggest that writing allows him to 
exorcise and resist the illness colonizing his body, in just the same 
way as his autofictionally constructed self uses writing to resist the 
dehumanised identity cast upon him by the medical environment. In 
this manner, he could be said to be reorientating himself in the post-
modern landscape. Presenting perhaps the ultimate form of resistance 
to the illness colonising him from within, writing allows Guibert to 
deny the erasure of selfhood that death would present. As Sarkonak 
argues: ‘il lui était devenu important, crucial même, de produire, 
d’écrire, de laisser sa trace, de laisser le plus de traces possibles’ 
(Sarkonak 1997b: 10). Resisting the ephemeral nature of his fore-
shortened life, through writing Guibert is able to leave a permanent 
trace or record of himself that cannot be erased. Providing him with 
the motivation to go on living, constituting a significant locus of resis-
tance against that which he is experiencing in his life, then, writing 
can be seen to be of the utmost significance in Guibert’s attempts to 
negotiate the postmodern world.

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
287 
Indeed, it is pertinent to return here to an argument that I dis-
cussed in chapter 3. Discussing the intratextual Guibert’s proposed 
walk along the side of a motorway and the disruptive vision that he 
would constitute, Murray Pratt argues that the narrator ‘would un-
doubtedly become a spectacular centre of attention. And it is in such 
terms – that is, as spectacular, promenading body – that he elects to 
envision himself in his text’ (Pratt 1998: 155). Pratt seems to be sug-
gesting that just as the intratextual narrator reappropriates the meaning 
of his sick body through exhibiting it in unexpected spaces, so Guibert 
may redefine his extratextual identity through the self he exhibits in 
the books that he writes. The notion that A l’ami could be classified as 
a resistant writing strategy is supported by Alex Hughes in Hetero-
graphies. She stresses, however, that it is the nature of the autofic-
tional, rather than the classically autobiographical, genre that permits 
the author to fully realise the potential of a literary construction of 
selfhood. Hughes argues that 
 
by virtue of its unwillingness to posit itself as a ‘case’ of transparent, 
(wholly) truthful, self-deciphering autobiographical writing, A l’ami 
deters its readers from using its contents to subject with any certainty 
its author Hervé Guibert to the kind of objectifying, evaluative scru-
tiny that would construct and produce him as an individual cas. 
(Hughes 1999: 114) 
 
In this way, the writer not only leaves a permanent trace of his own 
construction of selfhood, but he simultaneously disarms the reader, 
rendering him or her unable to draw any definite conclusions about 
the ‘truth’ of Guibert’s identity and therefore unable to ever confine 
the writer within the boundaries of the knowable and the classifiable. 
In fact, it is this fictional dimension to Guibert’s autofictions 
that provides the ultimate form of reorientation within the postmodern 
landscape. In incorporating non-factual elements into his constructions 
of selfhood the intratextual Guibert is able to further redefine the iden-
tity which external society imposes upon him. As Duncan argues in 
reference to Guibert’s writing: ‘d’un côté il sert à consolider le moi de 
l’écrivain face à son déssaroi corporel et, de l’autre, il invente la fic-
tion de sa dispersion’ (Duncan 1995: 103). It is to the fictional escape 
of the author that my discussion will now turn. 
In addition to providing the means to continue living and to re-
sist some aspects of his life, autofictional writing allows Guibert to re-

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
288 
fute the notion that his identity is fixed and thus his fate sealed. As 
Brad Epps contends, ‘Guibert s’accroche au genre romanesque, à une 
image de liberté, d’invention et de licence artistiques afin de contrer 
l’irrévocabilité du réel’ (Epps 1997: 52). Through writing, the narrator 
constructs an autofictional double whose identity is fragmented and 
shifting. Perhaps one of the most intriguing aspects of Guibert’s desire 
to rewrite his life autofictionally and thus escape his life is that repre-
sented by Le Paradis. This work has not constituted a major focus of 
analysis in this monograph, partly because in terms of generic status 
and content it is less strongly linked with Guibert’s AIDS corpus than 
the other works I have discussed.12 However, as I discussed in chapter 
2, it was written co-terminously with Cytomégalovirus at the end of 
Guibert’s life and I wish to contend that it is of particular relevance to 
the present discussion. 
In ‘Visions of Excess: Filming/Writing the Gay Self in Col-
lard’s Savage Nights’, Rollet and Williams argue that ‘for novelists 
writing on AIDS, a common method of approach is autobiographical, 
with textual play around identity, space and time functioning as a form 
of personal denial’ (Rollet and Williams 1998: 197). They go on to 
argue that Guibert rejects chronological time as a form of denial. 
However, examination of Le Paradis suggests that this is a text which 
denial pervades on many more levels than just that of chronological 
time. Reading the textual representations of space within this work, 
however, leads us to suspect that the key to this confusing blur of fic-
tion and self-referentiality is considerably more subtle than it may at 
first seem. As Murray Pratt argues: 
 
this is a text which allows its author to reinvent himself to write as 
HIV negative, heterosexual, as other than a writer, leaving behind 
Northern Europe for Africa, for Martinique, for Bora Bora, Guibert 
the author journeys to parallel and virtual identities which he may or 
may not have made as protagonist and as person. (Pratt 1997: 1) 
 
I wish to argue, then, that this work could be seen to be the final es-
cape of the bed-ridden, ailing Guibert, as he textually reconstructs a 
                                                 
12 
The narrator does retain the nominal appellation ‘Hervé Guibert’ (le P: 120) 
but is distanced from his counterpart inscribed in Guibert’s already well-read 
autofictional corpus by virtue of the fact that he does not adhere to the catego-
ries of homosexual and HIV positive.

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
289 
self who is physically free and mobile. Indeed, the journeys under-
taken by the protagonist of Le Paradis seem to play a considerably 
greater role in this work than in any other of Guibert’s novels. Whilst 
this self is overtly heralded as free of the constraints of an HIV posi-
tive body, analysis of the places to which the narrator travels seems to 
indicate that this text is not as free of AIDS as might at first be 
thought. Pratt argues that ‘while literally diluted to a trace element in 
the narrative, the theme of the body with AIDS dictates the impulsive 
departures, doublings and delusions which texture it’ (Pratt 1997: 1). 
Indeed, this work seems to contain many similar spatial concerns as 
those that I have already argued to pervade Guibert’s earlier autofic-
tional writings, but these are exaggerated. Reflecting classically post-
modern characteristics, the character of Jayne is argued by Alan Bu-
isine to be in perpetual motion. He tells us ‘elle ne vit, elle ne survit 
que dans le voyage, le mouvement, le déplacement, la vitesse. Impos-
sible pour elle de rester sur place’ (Buisine 1997: 111). Transferring 
his desire for movement onto another character as well as attributing 
to her a certain amount of blame for their jointly endured sexually 
transmitted disease, Guibert is able to use this fantastic autofictional 
text in order to explore in fiction some of his most deep-seated anxie-
ties whilst retaining some identitarian relationship of the main charac-
ter with himself. Retaining some of the key spatial and geo-cultural 
themes of his earlier autofictions, Le Paradis could be said to be the 
ultimate escape for the seriously ill Guibert, representing as it does an 
opportunity to cast off his definitively condemned status and physical 
circumscription. 
In sum, then, there is considerable evidence to suggest that Gui-
bert’s AIDS texts do, indeed, constitute a form of postmodern cartog-
raphy. Whilst they are underpinned by a different range of ontological 
principles to the works of Robin and Doubrovsky, Guibert’s autofic-
tions do seem to be grounded in literary practices consistent with 
postmodernism. In addition, whilst the spaces mapped out in these 
works do not display the same preoccupation with postmodern charac-
teristics such as cultural plurality and migration as the writings of 
Robin and Doubrovsky, the typically postmodern leitmotifs of the 
labyrinth and the monster are in evidence. The clearly life-changing 
nature of these AIDS texts for both the intra- and the extratextual 
Guibert indicates that they could indeed be classified as a kind of 
guide or chart through which the individual seeks to better orientate

Life Writing and Postmodern Cartography 
290 
himself in space. That is to say that these writings could, like those of 
Doubrovsky and Robin, be considered to be a form of ‘postmodern 
cartography’.

Conclusion 
 
 
This study has sought to bring into dialogue contemporary notions of 
‘space’ and a range of late twentieth-century life writing texts. The in-
vestigation has been underpinned by the argument that transforma-
tions in both critical perceptions and the nature of space in recent 
times have led to an increasingly pressing need to re-evaluate this 
fundamental aspect of all lived experience. More specifically, I sug-
gested in chapter 1 that questions of home space and cultural belong-
ing were becoming more urgent in the contemporary world, with sig-
nificant implications for both individual and collective cultural identi-
ties. After undertaking close readings of the life writing texts of Hervé 
Guibert, Serge Doubrovsky and Régine Robin in turn, I have estab-
lished that in each case, home space and cultural belonging are pre-
sented as deeply problematic, if strongly desired, phenomena. 
In the writings of Hervé Guibert, my discussion has highlighted 
the impact of the catastrophic and deeply stigmatised illness of AIDS 
upon his textual avatar’s sense of belonging. As I have argued, ‘Hervé 
Guibert’’s ‘marks of distinction’ as a privileged member of the French 
literary elite who is presented as situating himself primarily in the 
coveted spaces of the Parisian Left Bank, are undermined as he is 
drawn into stigma-laden medical spaces. I have argued that ‘Hervé 
Guibert’’s relationship with space can only be understood by analys-
ing the interdependent nature of body and space. It is against familiar, 
domestic spaces, for example, that he is presented as measuring his 
bodily decline. Perhaps more significantly, the body-space relation-
ship is shown to offer opportunities for ‘Guibert’ to resist his growing 
marginalisation, and to reinsert himself into those spaces from which 
he is increasingly excluded. That is to say that through introducing his 
sick body into unexpected places and thus contravening codes of nor-
mal behaviour, ‘Hervé Guibert’ is presented as reappropriating control 
over the definition of his sick body in society and attempting to re-
establish some sense of belonging.

Conclusion 
292 
Increasingly controlled and restricted in the space with which 
he is presented as having formerly felt a sense of unproblematic af-
filiation, that of Paris, Guibert’s autofictionally rendered self is pre-
sented as developing a growing desire to seek home elsewhere. The 
countries to which the intratextual ‘Guibert’ increasingly travels are 
places in which he can escape the disciplinary control of the Parisian 
medical establishment. Moreover, as my analysis has revealed, places 
such as Russia and Africa do not merely offer ‘Guibert’ the opportu-
nity to place himself in dangerous positions and in this way to wrest 
back control over his own death, but they are irrefutably bound up in 
geo-cultural mythologies of the genesis of the HIV virus. ‘Hervé Gui-
bert’ is presented, then, as seeking to engender a kind of confrontation 
with sites in which his unknowable illness might have come into exis-
tence, and in this way effecting a ‘return to the source’. It is amongst 
the ‘monsters’ of the AIDS-inflected landscape of North Africa that 
‘Guibert’ is cast as finding an alternative home. 
Despite not having garnered much critical attention until now, 
space does play an important role in Guibert’s AIDS texts as this 
study has sought to demonstrate. Whilst their subject matter is not at 
first glance obviously spatial, these texts are particularly valuable in 
terms of the light that they shed on the impact of stigmatised illness 
upon home space. Moreover, close analysis indicates the pervasive 
geo-cultural mythologies underpinning international perceptions of 
illnesses such as AIDS. The impact of such a disease upon both indi-
vidual and national senses of cultural belonging is clearly significant. 
The example of Guibert’s life writings, then, clearly adds weight to 
the argument advanced at the beginning of this study that all life, and 
therefore all literature, is worthy of spatial analysis. 
If ‘Guibert’’s sense of belonging in space is textually con-
structed as having been radically affected by the advent of the catas-
trophic illness of AIDS, then in the case of ‘Doubrovsky’, the sense of 
cultural displacement is both more pervasive and more deeply inter-
woven into his identity. I have argued Doubrovsky’s autofictions to be 
pervaded by a quest for ‘une place’ that is both geographical and cul-
tural, both literal and figurative. Moreover, it is fundamentally bound 
up with Doubrovsky’s textual avatar’s Jewish ethnicity, and his child-
hood experiences during the Occupation of Paris in the Second World 
War. This childhood sense of cultural dispossession, I have suggested, 
is presented as a primary motor for the intricate spatial structure

Conclusion 
293 
through which the adult ‘Doubrovsky’ lives his life. Despite establish-
ing himself in the ‘New World’ and finding his ethnicity to be consid-
erably less problematic there, my analysis has suggested that ‘Dou-
brovsky’ is constructed as never intending to renounce being French. 
In fact, his time in the US is presented as an opportunity to gain cul-
tural capital with which to renegotiate his position in his French 
homeland. So deeply interwoven in ‘Doubrovsky’’s identity is the di-
vision between the US and France, however, that a reading fuelled by 
Lacanian theory was found to shed considerable light upon this phe-
nomenon. In sum, the topic of home space and cultural belonging has 
been shown to be of paramount importance within Doubrovsky’s 
autofictions. These works paint a striking picture of an individual 
whose sense of cultural affiliation and home space is clearly identi-
fied, and yet who is excluded from this site by the particular ideologi-
cal forces within society. 
In fact, the parallels between the constructions of home space in 
Robin’s writings and those of Doubrovsky are striking. Expressing a 
feeling of disorientation and lack of a clear home space, for example, 
the various voices of Robin’s works seem repeatedly to tell us of their 
feeling of a lack of spatial belonging. Moreover, constructing Paris as 
the site of childhood, Robin’s texts, like those of Doubrovsky, portray 
this city as indelibly marked and tarnished by the events of the Second 
World War. However, if in ‘Doubrovsky’’s case, the desired home 
space is clearly identified if unattainable, then for Robin’s intratextual 
characters, home space is even more problematic. As I have argued, 
these works are haunted by notions of lost ‘home spaces’ in the form 
of Jewish ghettos that were destroyed in the Second World War. 
Faced with the impossibility of re-creating such idealised sites of be-
longing, Robin’s protagonists seem unable to establish anything other 
than temporary home spaces in any place. Indeed, in their multifaceted 
narrations of tales of migration, these works are united by a shared 
will to dramatise the impact of inhabiting different spaces upon ques-
tions of identity and upon survival itself. Home is presented as provi-
sional and fragile, and is always coloured by a struggle for existence 
between different cultural and ethnic identities. In this way, all three 
of Robin’s literary writings seem to directly question what it means to 
belong in space, particularly as a Jewish person struggling with the af-
termath of the Holocaust. Bearing the impossible weight of the de-
struction of their ethnic and cultural heritage, then, Robin’s personna-

Conclusion 
294 
ges are presented as seeking recourse to ‘non-lieux’ in which no form 
of memory is possible. That is to say that, failing to find any place in 
which the complexities of their cultural and ethnic identities can be 
unproblematically inscribed, Robin’s characters establish some form 
of home space in ahistorical sites of transit such as airports and hotel 
rooms. 
In each of the life writing corpuses addressed in this study, then, 
issues of ‘home spaces’ and cultural ‘belonging’ are of paramount im-
portance. From the textual articulations of Guibert through to those of 
Robin, notions of ‘home’ and ‘belonging’ can be seen to become more 
complex and more problematic. From ‘Guibert’, whose sense of cul-
tural affiliation is deeply rooted but is thrown into doubt by the ex-
treme experience of the HIV virus, to Robin’s characters, whose home 
space is definitively lost and whose cultural affiliations are multiple 
and competing, the analysis of home space in these works has been 
deeply revealing. Indeed, it is central to this study to contend that the 
spatial analysis of life writing texts such as these does not only illumi-
nate our understanding of the texts themselves. In their intricate narra-
tions of the impacts of some of the most significant events of the 
twentieth century upon geo-cultural identity, these life writings com-
prise invaluable resources in deepening our understanding of the ex-
perience of space itself. As I argued in chapter 6, in the case of each of 
these authors, life writing could be said to constitute a form of ‘post-
modern cartography’. That is to say that not only are these writings 
underpinned by principles that could be said to chime with the funda-
mental precepts of postmodernism, but that each, in different ways, 
maps out spaces that display postmodern characteristics. For each in-
dividual, there is evidence to suggest that writing constitutes a form of 
active guide, both symbolic and geographical, which helps to orientate 
them in the confusion of the postmodern world. Moreover, it is my 
contention that these personalised, multi-layered and shifting narra-
tives, whilst in many ways constituting the antithesis of static and ra-
tional maps, offer a richness of vision of contemporary space that 
should not be underestimated by geographers: text-led readings of 
space may provide a particularly useful way in which to replace the 
emphasis on the individual, the subjective and the personal in geo-
graphical enquiry. 
In sum, it is hoped that this study has gone some way towards 
its objective of opening up the channels of communication between

Conclusion 
295 
the fields of geography and literary studies in order that the underlying 
assumptions that have sometimes dogged this interdisciplinary terrain 
might undergo a re-evaluation. The text-led readings undertaken in 
this book have aimed to demonstrate that it is not only those texts that 
are most obviously concerned with spatial phenomena that are worthy 
of spatial analysis: all life experience, and hence all life writing, oc-
curs within and is mediated by space. Moreover, it is my strong belief 
that focus upon the nuanced, complex narrations of space proffered in 
literature has the potential to be of much greater significance to those 
within the discipline of Geography than its traditional role might sug-
gest. Altogether, it seems clear that further exploration of this interdis-
ciplinary subject area has much to offer.

Bibliography 
 
 
Primary Texts 
 
Doubrovsky, Serge. 1977. Fils. Paris: Galilée. 
–– 1982. Un amour de soi. Paris: Hachette. 
–– 1989. Le Livre brisé. Paris: Grasset. 
–– 1994. L’Après-Vivre. Paris: Grasset. 
–– 1999. Laissé pour conte. Paris: Grasset. 
Guibert, Hervé. 1990. A l’ami qui ne m’a pas sauvé la vie. Paris: Gallimard. 
–– 1991. Le Protocole compassionnel. Paris: Gallimard. 
–– 1992a. L’Homme au chapeau rouge. Paris: Gallimard. 
–– 1992b. Cytomégalovirus. Paris: Seuil. 
–– 1992c. Le Paradis. Paris: Gallimard. 
Robin, Régine. 1983. La Québécoite. Montreal: TYPO. 
–– 1996a. L’Immense Fatigue des pierres. Montreal: XYZ. 
–– Papiers perdus. http://www.er.uqam.ca/nobel/r24136/bio.html  
 
 
Other Literary Texts by Key Authors 
 
Doubrovsky, Serge. 1969. La Dispersion. Paris: Mercure de France. 
–– 1985. La Vie, l’instant. Paris: Ballard. 
— 1980. Suzanne et Louise. 
Guibert, Hervé. 1985. Des Aveugles. Paris: Gallimard. 
–– 1986. Mes Parents. Paris: Gallimard. 
–– 1989. Fou de Vincent. Paris: Minuit. 
–– 1989. L’Incognito. Paris: Gallimard. 
–– 1988. Les Gangsters. Paris: Minuit. 
 
 
Secondary Texts 
 
Akeret, Robert U. 1997. The Man Who Loved a Polar Bear and Other Psychothera-
pist’s Tales [1996]. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 
Anctil, Pierre. 2001. ‘Vers une relecture de l’héritage littéraire yiddish montréalaise’ 
in Etudes françaises 37 (3): 9-27. 
Anderson, Benedict. 1983. Imagined Communities. London: Verso. 
Antle, Martine. 1997. ‘The Frame of Desire in the Novel of the 1980s and 1990s’ in 
Fisher and Schehr (1997): 185-195. 
Apter, Emily. 1993. ‘Fantom Images: Hervé Guibert and the Writing of ‘sida’ in 
France’ in Murphy and Poirier (1993): 83-95. 
–– 1998. ‘Harem: Colonial Fiction and Architectural Fantasm in Turn-of-the-Century 
France’ [1994] in Nast and Pile (1998): 119-131.

Bibliography 
298 
Ashcroft, Bill, Gareth Griffiths and Helen Tiffin (eds). 1994. The Post-colonial Stud-
ies Reader. London: Routledge. 
Augé, Marc. 1992. Non-lieux: introduction à une anthropologie de la surmodernité. 
Paris: Editions du Seuil. 
Bachelard, Gaston. 1974. La Poétique de l’espace [1957]. Paris: Presses Universitai-
res de France. 
Baillie, Kate, and Tim Salmon. 1997. Paris: the rough guide [1987]. London: Rough 
Guides Ltd. 
Bailly, Antoine (ed.). 1998. Les Concepts de la géographie humaine [1984]. Paris: 
Armand Collin. 
Barker, Chris. 2000. Cultural Studies: Theory and Practice. London and New Delhi: 
Sage. 
Barnes, Trevor J., and James S. Duncan (eds). 1992. Writing Worlds: Discourse, Text 
and Metaphor in the Representation of Landscape. London: Routledge. 
― 1992. ‘Introduction: Writing Worlds’ in Barnes and Duncan (1992): 1-13. 
Baudelle, Yves. 1997. ‘Cartographie réelle et géographie romanesque: poétique de la 
transposition’ in Lavergne (1997): 45-63. 
Baudrillard, Jean. 1978. Le Système des objets [1968]. Paris: Gallimard. 
Benjamin, Walter. 1979. One Way Street and Other Writings (tr. E. Jephcott and K. 
Shorter). London: NLB. 
Benko, Georges, and Ulf Strohmayer (eds). 1997a. Space and Social Theory: Inter-
preting Modernity and Postmodernity [1996]. Oxford: Blackwell. 
–– 1997b. ‘Writing Space, Forming Identities’ in Benko and Strohmayer (1997): 115-
116. 
Benko, Georges. 1997. ‘Introduction: Modernity, Postmodernity and the Social Sci-
ences’ in Benko and Strohmayer (1997): 1-26. 
Bernstein, Michèle. 1993. ‘Hervé Guibert. Une saison en Afrique’ in Libération (14 
January 1993). 
Bessière, Jean (ed.). 1994. Modernité, fiction, déconstruction. Paris: Lettres modernes. 
Bhabha, Homi K. 1994. The Location of Culture [1991]. London and New York: 
Routledge. 
Bianciotti, Hector. 1991. ‘La mort d’Hervé Guibert’ in Le Monde (30th December 
1991). 
–– 1994. ‘Guibert par-delà de la mort’ in Le Monde (30th September 1994). 
Biasi, Pierre-Marc de. 2000. ‘La Ville comme roman’, La Magazine littéraire 391: 
99-102 (October 2000).  
Blunt, Alison, and Gillian Rose. 1994. Writing Women and Space: Colonial and Post-
colonial Geographies. London: Guildford Press. 
Boffin, Tessa, and Sunil Gupta. 1990. Ecstatic Antibodies: Resisting the AIDS My-
thology. London: Rivers Oran Press. 
Boulé, Jean-Pierre. 1995a. A l’ami qui ne m’a pas sauvé la vie and other writings. 
Glasgow: Glasgow French and German Publications. 
–– 1995b. ‘Hervé Guibert à la télévision: vérité et séduction’ in Nottingham French 
Studies 34 (1): 112-120.  
–– 1997a. ‘Guibert ou la radicalisation du projet sartrien d’écriture existentielle’ in 
Sarkonak (1997): 25-42. 
–– 1997b. ‘“Tout ange est terrible” (A propos des articles nécrologiques sur Hervé 
Guibert)’ in L’Esprit créateur, 37 (3): 61-71.

Bibliography 
299 
–– 1999. Voices of the Self. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press. 
–– 2001. ‘Hervé Guibert: création littéraire et roman faux’ in The French Review. 74 
(3): 527-536. 
Braudeau, Michel. 1990. ‘Ecrire contre la montre’ in Le Monde (2nd March 1990). 
–– 1991. ‘Ecrire avec son sang: Le Protocole compassionnel d’Hervé Guibert’ in Le 
Monde (22nd February 1991). 
–– 1993. ‘Les Grands départs’ in Le Monde (15th January 1993). 
Brosseau, Marc. 1996. Des romans-géographies. Paris: L'Harmattan. 
Buisine, Alan. 1997. ‘À toute allure, Hervé Guibert’ in Sarkonak (1997): 97-112. 
Buot, François. 1999. Hervé Guibert: le jeune homme et la mort. Paris: Grasset. 
Burgelin, Claude. 1997. ‘Ecriture de soi, ecriture de l’Histoire: esquisses autour d’un 
conflit’ in Chiantaretto (1997): 97-106. 
Cahill, Kevin M. (ed.). 1984. The AIDS Epidemic [1983]. London: Hutchinson. 
Canovas, F. 1998. ‘De l’érotique à l’esthétique: approche de lecture, lecture de 
l’approche’ in Nottingham French Studies 37 (1): 107-121. 
Caron, David. 1995. ‘Playing Doctors: Refiguring the Doctor-Patient Relationship in 
Hervé Guibert’s AIDS novels’ in Literature and Medicine 14 (2): 237-249. 
Carroll, David. 1999. ‘The Limits of Representation and the Right to Fiction: Shame, 
Literature and the Memory of the Shoah’ in L’Esprit créateur, 39 (4): 68-79. 
Carter, Paul. 1987. ‘Naming Place’ in Ashcroft et al. (1987): 402-406. 
Caviedes, Cesar. 1987. ‘The Latin American Boom-town in the Literary View of Jose 
Maria Arguedas’ [1986] in Mallory and Simpson-Housley (1987): 57-77. 
Célestin, Roger. 1997. ‘Interview with Serge Doubrovsky: Autofiction and Beyond’ 
in SITES. 1 (2): 397-405. 
Certeau, Michel de. 1988. The Practice of Everyday Life [1984] (tr. S. Rendall). Los 
Angeles and London: University of California Press. 
Certeau, Michel de. 1990. L’Invention du quotidien: 1. Arts de faire. Paris: Gallimard 
Folio. 
Chambers, Iain. 1994. ‘Leaky Habitats and Broken Grammar’ in George Robertson et 
al. (1994): 245-249. 
Chambers, Ross. 1997. ‘The Suicide Experiment: Hervé Guibert’s AIDS Video, La 
Pudeur ou l’impudeur’ in L’Esprit créateur. 37 (3): 72-82. 
Chapman, Rosemary. 2000. Siting the Quebec Novel. Bern: Peter Lang. 
Chard-Hutchinson, Martine. 1994. ‘Mémoire, réticences et élans: Le Livre Brisé, Ser-
ge Doubrovsky’ in Bessière (1994): 159-173. 
Chesneaux, Jean. 1989. Modernité-Monde. Paris: La Découverte. 
Chevalier, Anne. 1997. ‘Avant-propos’ in Gascoigne (1997): 9-10. 
Chiantaretto, Jean-François. 1993. ‘Ecriture de son analyse et autofiction: le «cas» 
Serge Doubrovsky’ in Doubrovsky, Lecarme and Lejeune (1993): 165-180. 
–– 1995. De l’Acte autobiographique; le psychanalyste et l’écriture autobiographi-
que. Paris : Editions Champ Vallon. 
–– (ed.). 1996. Ecriture de soi et psychanalyse. Paris: L’Harmattan. 
–– 1997. Ecriture de soi, écriture de l’histoire. Paris: In Press Editions. 
–– 1998. Ecriture de soi et trauma. Paris: ANTHROPOS. 
Claval, Paul. 1995. La Géographie culturelle. Paris: Nathan Université. 
–– 1998. ‘La Géographie sociale et culturelle’ in Bailly (1998): 99-109. 
Clifford, James. 1988. The Predicament of Culture. Massachusetts and London: Har-
vard University Press.

Bibliography 
300 
–– 1997. Routes: Travel and Translation in the Late Twentieth-Century. London: 
Harvard University Press. 
Cohn-Sherbok, Lavina, and Dan Cohn-Sherbok. 1995. A Popular Dictionary of Juda-
ism. Richmond: Curzon Press. 
Conley, Tom. 1996. ‘Le Cinéaste de la vie moderne’: Paris as Map in Film, 1924-34’ 
in Sheringham (1996): 72-84. 
Contat, Michel. 2001. ‘Quand je n’écris pas, je ne suis pas écrivain’ in Genesis, 16 
(2001), 119-135. 
Cosgrove, Denis, and Mona Domosh. 1993. ‘Author and Authority’ in Duncan and 
Ley (1993): 25-38. 
Crimp, Douglas (ed.). 1988. AIDS: Cultural Analysis, Cultural Activism. London and 
Massachusetts: MIT. 
Crow, Dennis. 1996. Geography and Identity: Living and Exploring the Geopolitics of 
Identity. Washington: Maisonneuve Press. 
Daniels, Stephen, and Denis Cosgrove. 1993. ‘Spectacle and Text: Landscape Meta-
phors in Cultural Geography’ in Duncan and Ley (1993): 57-77. 
Danto, Bruno. 2000. ‘Courrier électronique: vers une révolution de l’écriture’ in Le 
Monde (21st April 2000). 
Darrieussecq, Marie. 1995. ‘La Notion de leurre chez Hervé Guibert: Décryptage d’un 
roman-leurre, L’Incognito’ in Nottingham French Studies. 34 (1): 82-87. 
–– 1997a. ‘Je de fiction’ in Le Monde (24th January 1997). 
–– 1997b. ‘De l’autobiographie à l’autofiction: Mes Parents, roman?’ in Sarkonak 
(1997): 115-132. 
Davis, Colin, and Elizabeth Fallaize. 2000. French Fiction in the Mitterand Years: 
Memory, Narrative, Desire. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Davis, Mike. 1984. City of Quartz: Excavating the Future in Los Angeles. London and 
New York: Verso. 
Dear, Michael. 1997. ‘Postmodern Bloodlines’ in Benko and Strohmayer (1997): 49-
71. 
Décarie, Isabelle 1996. ‘Le Paradis d’Hervé Guibert’, POST (Summer 1996): 67-71. 
–– 2000. ‘L’Identité posthume dans Le Paradis d’Hervé Guibert’ in L’Esprit créateur 
40 (1): 100-110. 
Defert, Daniel. 2000. ‘Foucault refusé, Foucault instrumentalisé’ in Le Monde (26th 
June 2000). 
Delon, Michel. 2002. ‘Philippe Lejeune: Pour l’autobiographie’ in La Magazine litté-
raire 409: 20-23 (May 2002). 
Delvaux, Martine. 1997. ‘Des corps et des frontières: les lieux du sida’ in L’Esprit 
créateur 37 (Fall 1997) : 83-93. 
Dicken, Peter, and Peter E. Lloyd. 1981. Modern Western Society: A Geographical 
Perspective on Work, Home and Well-Being. London: Harper and Row. 
Doubrovsky, Serge. 1970. ‘La Crise de la critique française’ in La Nouvelle revue 
française 283 (December 1970) : 51-77. 
–– 1980. ‘Autobiographie, Vérité, Psychanalyse’ in L’Esprit créateur 20 (3): 87-97. 
–– 1988. Autobiographiques: de Corneille à Sartre. Paris: PUF. 
–– 1992. ‘Introduction à la lecture’ in Hornung and Ruhe (1992): 131-183. 
–– 2000. ‘Autofiction et écriture de soi’. Paper presented at Colloque sur Serge Dou-
brovsky (Université de Dijon, November 2000).

Bibliography 
301 
Doubrovsky, Serge, Jacques Lecarme and Philippe Lejeune (eds). 1993. Autofictions 
et cie. Paris: Université de Paris X. 
Dubois, Jacques. 1991. ‘En finir avec la marginalité’ in Gauvin and Kinkenberg 
(1991): 119-129. 
Duchet, Claude, and Stéphane Vachon (eds). 1998. La Recherche littéraire: objets et 
méthodes [1993]. Montreal and Paris: XYZ. 
Duncan, Derek. 1995. ‘Gestes autobiographiques: le sida et les formes d’expressions 
artistiques du moi’ in Nottingham French Studies 34 (1): 100-111. 
Duncan, James, and David Ley (eds). 1993a. Place/ Culture/ Representation. London: 
Routledge. 
–– 1993b. ‘Introduction: Representing the Place of Culture’ in Duncan and Ley 
(1993): 1-21. 
Duncan, Nancy (ed.). 1996a. Body Space: Destabilising Geographies of Gender and 
Sexuality. London: Routledge. 
–– 1996b. ‘Renegotiating Gender and Sexuality in Public and Private Spaces’ in Dun-
can (1996): 127-145. 
Eagleton, Terry. 1996. The Illusions of Postmodernism. Oxford and Massachusetts: 
Blackwell. 
Eakin, Paul John. 1992. Touching the World: Reference in Autobiography. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 
Edelman, Lee. 1988. ‘The Mirror and the Tank: ‘AIDS’, Subjectivity and the Rhetoric 
of Activism’ in Crimp (1988): 9-34. 
Egan, Susanna, and Gabriele Helms. 2002. ‘Auto/biography? Yes. But Canadian?’ in 
Canadian Literature 172 (Spring 2002): 5-37. 
Encyclopaedia of Greek Mythology. On line at http://www.mythweb.com/encyc/ 
(consulted 16.12.2001) 
Epps, Brad.1997. ‘Le Corps ‹techno-ascétique›; Guibert, le sida, et l’art de la maîtrise 
de soi’ in Sarkonak (1997): 43-62. 
Fisher, Dominique D., and Laurence R. Schehr (eds). 1997. Articulations of Differ-
ence: Gender Studies and Writing in French. Stanford: Stanford University 
Press. 
Foucault, Michel. 1977. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. London: Al-
len Lane. 
–– 1986. ‘Des espaces autres’ in Architecture, Mouvement, Continuité. n°5, octobre 
1984: 46-49. 
― 1996. Surveiller et punir : la prison vingt ans après [1975]. Paris: Credmess. 
Gaffney, Phyllis. 1997. ‘Jean Sans Terre Ferme ou le Regard à travers le livre : espa-
ces et identité dans Les Mots de Jean-Paul Sartre’ in Gascoigne (1997): 77-97. 
Gascoigne, David (ed.). 1997a. Le Moi et ses espaces: quelques repères identitaires 
dans la littérature française contemporaine. Caen: Presses universitaires de 
Caen. 
–– 1997b. ‘Voyages autour du moi’ in Gascoigne (1997): 11-13. 
Gaussen, Frederic. 2000. ‘Foucault et Hervé Guibert, le compagnon d’agonie’ in Le 
Monde (8th May 2000). 
Gauvin, Lise. 1997a. ‘D’une langue l’autre: la surconscience linguistique de l’écrivain 
francophone’ in Gauvin (1997): 5-15. 
–– 1997b. L’Ecrivain francophone à la croisée des langues. Paris: Karthala.

Bibliography 
302 
–– 1999. Les langues du roman: du plurilinguisme comme stratégie textuelle. Mon-
treal: PUM. 
Gauvin, Lise, and Laurent Mailhot. 1982. Guide culturel du Québec. Montréal: Boréal 
Express. 
Gauvin, Lise, and Jean-Marie Kinkenberg (eds). 1991. Ecrivain cherche lecteur: 
l’écrivain francophone et ses publics. Paris and Quebec: Editions Créaphis 
and VLB Editeur. 
Genette, Gérard. 1991. Fiction et diction. Paris: Seuil. 
Gifford, Paul. 1997. ‘Cette ville et le coeur des choses: les espaces du moi pervers 
dans La Chute d’Albert Camus’ in Gascoigne (1997): 33-57. 
Gilloch, Graeme. 1997. Myth and Metropolis: Walter Benjamin and the City [1996]. 
Cambridge: Polity. 
Gilmore, Leigh, Kathleen Ashley, and Gerald Peters (eds). 1994a. Autobiography and 
Postmodernism. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. 
Gilmore, Leigh. 1994b. ‘The Mark of Autobiography: Postmodernism, Autobiogra-
phy, and Genre’ in Gilmore, Ashley and Peters (1994): 3-20. 
Gilroy, Paul. 1993. The Black Atlantic: Modernity and Double Consciousness. Lon-
don: Verso. 
Glissant, Edouard. 1996. Introduction à une poétique du divers. Paris: Gallimard. 
Graham, Stephen. 1997. ‘Imagining the Real-Time City: Telecommunications, Urban 
Paradigms and the Future of Cities’ in Westwood and Williams (1997): 31-48. 
Grosz, Elizabeth. 1998. ‘Bodies-Cities’ in Nast and Pile (1998): 42-51. 
Guibert, Hervé. 1990. ‘Apostrophes’ (16th March 1990). 
–– 1993. ‘«Le Coeur fatigué». Extraits inédits du journal de Hervé Guibert. Autour du 
«Paradis»’ in Libération (14th January 1993). 
Harel, Simon. 1992. ‘La Parole orpheline de l’écrivain migrant’ in Nepveu and Mar-
cotte (1992): 373-418. 
–– 2000. ‘Le Fauteuil d’écoute’ in Laouyen (2000): 37-50. 
Harvey, David. 1989. The Condition of Postmodernity [1980]. Oxford: Blackwell, 
1989. 
Heathcote, Owen. 1995. ‘From Cold War to AIDS War: Narratives of Identity from 
Gide’s Retour de l’URSS to Guibert’s Cytomégalovirus’ in Modern and Con-
temporary France 3 (1995): 427-437. 
Heathcote, Owen, Alex Hughes and James S. Williams (eds). 1998a. Gay Signatures: 
Gay and Lesbian Theory, Fiction and Film in France, 1945-1995. Oxford: 
Berg, 1998. 
–– 1998b. ‘Introduction: Reading Gay Signatures’ in Heathcote, Hughes and Williams 
(1998): 1-17. 
Higonnet, Margaret R., and Joan Templeton (eds). 1994. Reconfigured Spheres: 
Feminist Explorations of Literary Space. Amherst: University of Massachu-
setts Press. 
Higonnet, Margaret R. 1994. ‘Mapping the Text: Critical Metaphors’ in Higonnet and 
Templeton (1994): 194-212. 
Hill, Leslie. 1995. ‘Ecrire la maladie’ in Nottingham French Studies 34 (1): 89-99. 
Hillis, Ken. 1998. ‘Human Language Machine’ in Nast and Pile (1998): 52-71. 
Hooks, Bell. 1990. Yearning: Race, Gender and Cultural Politics. Boston: South End 
Press.

Bibliography 
303 
Hornung, Alfred, and Ernstpeter Ruhe (eds). 1992. Autobiographie et l’Avant-Garde. 
Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag. 
Hornung, Alfred. 1992. ‘Postmodern Experience and Avant-garde Autobiography: 
Ronald Sukenick’s Life in Fiction’ in Hornung and Ruhe (1992): 401-412. 
Huggan, Graham. 1995. ‘Decolonizing the Map’ in Ashcroft et al. (1994): 407-411. 
Hughes, Alex. 1993. ‘Serge Doubrovsky’s “Gender Trouble: Writing the (Homo) 
textual Self in Un Amour de soi”’ in French Forum 20 (3): 314-331. 
–– 1999. Heterographies. Oxford and New York: Berg. 
–– ‘Interview with Serge Doubrovsky’ (1999). On line at http://artsweb.bham. 
ac.uk/artsFrenchStudies/Sergedou/intervw .htm (consulted 19.07.2006). 
Ireland, John. 1993. ‘Introduction: Monstrous Writing’ in Genre 45: 1-11. 
Jaccomard, Hélène. 1993. Lecteur et lecture dans l’autobiographie française contem-
poraine: Violette Leduc, Françoise d’Eaubonne, Serge Doubrovsky, Margue-
rite Yourcenar. Genève: Droz. 
–– 1995. ‘La Thanatologie chez Hervé Guibert’ in Journal of European Studies 25 : 
283-302. 
Jackson, Peter. 1989. Maps of Meaning. London and New York: Routledge. 
Jameson, Fredric. 1984. ‘Postmodernism, or The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism’ 
in New Left Review 146 (1): 53-92. 
–– 1988. ‘The Politics of Theory: Ideological Positions in the Postmodernism Debate’ 
in Lodge (1988): 373-383. This piece was originally published in Fredric 
Jameson, The Ideologies of Theory, Essays, 1971 - 1986: Vol. 2 The Syntax of 
History (London: Routledge, 1988). 
–– 1991. Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism [1990]. London: 
Verso. 
Jarvis, Brian. 1998. Postmodern Cartographies: The Geographical Imagination in 
Contemporary American Culture. London: Pluto. 
Johnson, Randal (ed.). 1993. Pierre Bourdieu: The Field of Cultural Production- Es-
says on Art and Literature. Cambridge: Polity. 
Jouan-Westlund, Annie. 1997. ‘Serge Doubrovsky’s Autofiction: De l’autobiographie 
considérée comme une tauromachie/ Autobiography as Bullfighting’ in SITES 
1 (2): 415-431. 
Jourde, Pierre. 1991. Géographies imaginaries de quelques inventeurs de mondes au 
XXe siècle. Paris: José Corti. 
Kaplan, Caren. 1992. ‘Resisting Autobiography: Out-Law Genres and Transnational 
Feminist Subjects’ in Smith and Watson (1992): 115-138. 
–– 1996. Questions of Travel: Postmodern Discourses of Displacement. Durham and 
London: Duke University Press. 
Karancheti, Indira. 1994. ‘The Geographics of Marginality: Place and Textuality in 
Simone Schwartz-Bart and Anita Desai’ in Higonnet and Templeton (1994): 
125-144. 
Kasinitz, P. (ed.). 1986. Metropolis: Centre and Symbol of our Times. London: Mac-
millan. 
Kedward, H.R. 1985. Occupied France; Collaboration and Resistance, 1940-1944. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 
Keefe, Terry, and Edmund Smyth (eds). 1995. Autobiography and the Existential Self: 
Studies in Modern French Writing. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.

Bibliography 
304 
Keith, Michael, and Steve Pile (eds). 1996. Place and the Politics of Identity [1993]. 
London: Routledge. 
Kennedy, Stanislaus. 1996. ‘Preface’ in Parkinson (1996): vii-viii. 
King, Anthony D. 1996. Re-presenting the City: Ethnicity, Capital and Culture in the 
Twenty-First Century Metropolis [1995]. New York: New York University 
Press. 
Kirby, Kathleen M. 1996. ‘Re-mapping Subjectivity: Cartographic Vision and Limits 
of Politics’ in Duncan (1996): 45-55. 
Knox, Paul, and Steven Pinch (eds). 1987. Urban Social Geography: An Introduction 
[1982]. Essex: Prentice Hall. 
Kofman, Eleanore, and Elizabeth Lebas (eds). 1996. Henri Lefebvre: Writings on Cit-
ies. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Lacan, Jacques. 1966. ‘Le séminaire sur ‹La Lettre volée›’ in Écrits I. Paris: Éditions 
du Seuil: 19-75. 
Land, Hilligje Van’t. 1999. ‘Les Littératures migrantes au Québec existent-elles?’ in 
Le Monde (19th March 1999). 
Laouyen, Mounir (ed.). 2000. Perceptions et réalisations du moi. Clermont-Ferrand: 
Presses Universitaires de Blaise Pascal. 
–– ‘L’Autofiction: une réception problématique’. On line at http://www.fabula.org/ 
forum/colloque99/208.php (consulted 1.06.2002). 
–– 2002. ‘Préface’ in L’Esprit créateur 57 (4): 3-7. 
Lash, Scott, and John Urry. 1994. Economies of Signs and Spaces [1993]. London: 
Sage. 
Lavastine-Laignel, Alexandra. 1999. ‘Les Identités éclatées de Régine Robin’ in Le 
Monde (19th March 1999). 
Lavergne, Gérard (ed.). 1997. Création de l’espace et narration littéraire. Nice: Uni-
versité de Nice. 
Lee, Dennis. 1999. ‘Writing in Colonial Space’ in Ashcroft et al. (1994): 397-401. 
Lefebvre, Henri. 1974. La Production de l’espace. Paris: Èditions Anthropos. 
― 1991. The Production of space. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Lehan, Richard. 1998. The City in Literature: An Intellectual and Cultural History. 
London: University of California Press. 
Lejeune, Philippe. 1975. Le Pacte autobiographique. Paris: Seuil. 
–– 1986. Moi aussi. Paris: Seuil. 
–– 1989. Cher Cahier. Paris: Gallimard. 
–– 2000. Cher Ecran. Paris: Seuil. 
Lemaire, Anika. 1970. Jacques Lacan. London: Routledge. 
Lepape, Pierre. 1998. ‘Au-delà de l’autofiction’ in Le Monde des livres (6th Novem-
ber 1998). 
Lévy, Bertrand. 1991. ‘L’Empreint et le déchiffrement : géopoétique et géographie 
humaniste’ in Géographie de la culture: espace, existence, expression (Nî-
mes: Cahiers de Géopoétique : Série colloques:27-35). 
Lévy, Clara. 1984. Ecritures de l’identité: les écrivains juifs après la Shoah. Paris: 
Presses Universitaires de France. 
Lloyd, Christopher (ed.). 1995. Epidemics and Sickness in French Literature and Cul-
ture. Durham: University of Durham Modern Languages Series. 
Lodge, David (ed.). 1988. Modern Criticism and Theory. London and New York: 
Longman.

Bibliography 
305 
Louette, Jean-François. 2000-2001. ‘Je ne cherche aucune absolution, mais un parta-
ge’ in Les Temps modernes 611-612 : 210-218. 
Lucy, Niall. 1997. Postmodern Literary Theory: an Introduction. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Lupton, Deborah. 1994. Medicine as Culture: Illness, Disease and the Body in West-
ern Society. London and New Delhi: Sage. 
Ly, Amadou 1999. ‘Le pérégrinisme comme stratégie textuelle d’appropriation de la 
langue d’écriture’ in Gauvin (1999): 87-100. 
Lyotard, Jean-François. 1979. La Condition postmoderne: rapport sur le savoir. Paris: 
Minuit. 
McDowell, Linda. 1996. ‘Spatializing Feminism: Geographic Perspectives’ in Duncan 
(1996): 28-44. 
McElroy, Ruth. 1997. ‘Cymraes Oddi Cartref?: Welsh Women Writing Home and 
Migration’ in Norquay and Smyth (1997): 283-295. 
McNay, Lois. 1994. Foucault: A Critical Introduction. Cambridge: Polity. 
Magnan, Lucie-Marie, and Christian Morin. 1997. Lectures du postmodernisme dans 
le roman québécois. Montréal: Nuit Blanche. 
Mallory, William E., and Paul Simpson-Housley (eds). 1987a. Geography and Litera-
ture: A Meeting of the Disciplines [1986]. New York: Syracuse University 
Press. 
–– 1987b. ‘Preface’ in Mallory and Simpson-Housley (1987): xi-xii. 
Marangoly George, Rosemary. 1999. The Politics of Home; Postcolonial Relocations 
in Twentieth-Century Fiction [1996]. Los Angeles and London: University of 
California Press. 
Marcuse, P. 1997. ‘The Enclave, The Citadel and The Ghetto: What Has Changed in 
the Postfordist US City’ in Urban Affairs Review 33 (2): 228-264. 
Marks, Laura U. 2000. The Skin of the Film: Intercultural Cinema, Embodiment, and 
The Senses. Durham and London: Duke University Press. 
Marrus, Michael R., and Robert D. Paxton. 1995. Vichy France and the Jews [1981]. 
Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Martel, Frédéric. 1994. ‘Guibert, Koltès, Copi: littérature et sida’ in Esprit: 165-173. 
Massey, Doreen. 1996a. ‘Politics and Space/Time’ in Keith and Pile (1996): 141-159. 
–– 1996b. ‘Masculinity, Dualisms and High Technology’ in Duncan (1996): 109-126. 
Miguet-Ollagnier, Marie. 1992a. ‘Un amour de soi: Doubrovsky et Proust ou le père 
profané’ in Lettres Romanes 46 (1-2): 69-87. 
–– 1992b. ‘“Le Saveur Sartre” du Livre brisé’ in Hornung and Ruhe (1992): 141-
157.  
–– 2000-2001. ‘Lettres et autofiction: Serge Doubrovsky fait ses comptes’ in Les 
Temps modernes 611-612 : 179-191. 
Miguet-Ollagnier, Marie, and Philippe Baron (eds). 2000. Littérature et médicine. Be-
sançon: Presses universitaires Franc-Comtoises. 
Mills, Sara. 1991. Discourses of Difference: An Analysis of Women's Travel Writing 
and Colonialism. London: Routledge. 
Minh-ha, Trinh T. 1994. ‘Other than Myself/My Other Self’ in Robertson et al. 
(1994): 9-26. 
Mitchell, Kenneth. 1987. ‘Landscape and Literature’ [1986] in Mallory and Simpson-
Housley (1987): 23-56. 
Montremy, Jean-Maurice de. 2002. ‘L’Aventure de l’autofiction’ in La Magazine lit-
téraire. (May 2002): 62-64.

Bibliography 
306 
Moreau, Yves. 1996. ‘Le Paradis: un laissez-passer pour un lieu d’aisances’ in POST 
(Summer 1996): 31-33. 
Moretti, Franco. 1998. Atlas of the European Novel, 1800-1900. London: Verso. 
Morley, David. 2000. Home Territories: Media, Mobility and Identity. London: 
Routledge. 
Mortimer, Armine Kotin. 1993. ‘The Death of Autobiography in Doubrovsky’s Bro-
ken Novel’ in Genre 37: 85-108. 
Moruzzi, Norma Claire. 1993. ‘National Abjects: Julia Kristeva on the Process of Po-
litical Self-Identification’ in Oliver (1993): 136-142. 
Murphy, Richard. 1999. Theorizing the Avant-Garde: Modernism, Expressionism and 
the Problem of Postmodernity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Murphy, Timothy F., and Suzanne Poirier (eds). 1993. Writing Aids: Gay Literature, 
Language and Analysis. New York: Colombia University Press. 
Naficy, Hamid (ed.). 1999. Home Exile, Homeland. New York and London: Rout-
ledge. 
Nast, Heidi J. 1998. ‘The Body as “Place”: Reflexivity and Fieldwork in Kano, Nige-
ria’ in Nast and Pile (1998): 107-118. 
Nast, Heidi, J., and Steve Pile (eds). 1998a. Places Through the Body. London: 
Routledge. 
–– 1998b. ‘Introduction: Making Places Bodies’ in Nast and Pile (1998a): 1-22. 
Nepveu, Pierre, and Giles Marcotte (eds). 1992a. Montréal imaginaire: Ville et litté-
rature. Montreal: FIDES. 
–– 1992b. ‘Introduction: Montréal, sa littérature’ in Nepveu and Marcotte (1992a): 7-
12. 
Nepveu, Pierre. 1999. L’Ecologie du réel: Mort et naissance de la littérature québé-
coise contemporaine. Québec: Boréal. 
–– 2001a. ‘Présentation: Ecriture et judéité au Québec’ in Etudes françaises 37 (3): 5-
7. 
–– 2001b. ‘Désordre et vacuité: figures de la judéité québécoise-française’ in Etudes 
françaises, 37 (3): 69-83. 
Ning, Wang. 2000. ‘Postmodernity, Post-coloniality and Globalisation: A Chinese 
Perspective’ in Social Semiotics 10 (2): 221-233. 
Nora, Pierre (ed.). 1984-1993. Les Lieux de memoire, 7 vols. Paris: Gallimard. 
Norquay, Glenda, and Gerry Smyth (eds). 1997. Space and Place: the Geographies of 
Literature. Liverpool: Liverpool John Moores University Press. 
Oliver, Kelly, (ed.). 1993. Ethics, Politics and Difference in Julia Kristeva’s Writings. 
London: Routledge. 
Pagès, Jean-Luc. 2000. ‘L’Autocritique en littérature’ in Laouyen (2000): 155-187. 
Parker, Geoffrey. 1998. Geopolitics: Past, Present and Future [1997]. London: Pin-
ter. 
Parkinson, Siobhan (ed.). 1996. Home: An Anthology of Modern Irish Writing. Dub-
lin: A. & A. Farmar. 
Parr, Hester, and Chris Philo. 1995. ‘Mapping ‘Mad’ Identities’ in Pile and Thrift 
(1995): 199-211. 
Parsons, Deborah. 2000. Streetwalking the Metropolis: Women, the City and Moder-
nity. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Pasquali, Adrien. 1994. Le Tour des horizons: critique et récits de voyage. Paris: 
Klincksieck.

Bibliography 
307 
Peach, Linden. 1997. ‘Nation, Internal Difference and the New Geography’ in Nor-
quay and Smyth (1997): 9-29. 
Pearsall, Judy, and Bill Trumble (eds). 1996. Oxford English Reference Dictionary. 
Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. 
Peet, Richard. 1998. Modern Geographical Thought. Oxford and Massachusetts: 
Blackwell. 
Pérusse, Dénise. 1998. Pays littéraires du Québec. Montreal: L’Hexagone et VLB 
Editeur. 
Petersen, Alan. 1998. Unmasking the Masculine: ‘Men’ and ‘Identity’ in a Sceptical 
Age.  London: Sage. 
Pibarot, Annie. 2001. ‘L’Impossibilité de dire vrai’ in Encres vagabondes: création 
littéraire et magazine de l’écrit : 20-21. 
Pile, Steve, and Nigel Thrift. 1995. Mapping the Subject: Geographies of Cultural 
Transformation. London: Routledge. 
Pile, Steve, and Nigel Thrift. 1995a. ‘Mapping the Subject’ in Pile and Thrift (1995): 
14-50. 
–– 1995b. ‘The Limits of Identity’ in Pile and Thrift (1995): 195-211. 
Poirier, Suzanne. 1993. ‘On Writing AIDS: An Introduction’ in Murphy and Poirier 
(1993): 1-7. 
Pratt, Mary Louise. 1992. Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation. Lon-
don: Routledge. 
Pratt, Murray. 1998. ‘A Walk Along the Side of the Motorway: AIDS and the Spec-
tacular Body of Hervé Guibert’ in Heathcote et al. (1998): 151-172. 
–– 1997. ‘Imagining Positive Geographies: French AIDS Writing in the 1990s as Re-
fusing and Destabilising the Psycho-Social Untouchable Body’ in Mots Pluri-
els 1 (3): 1-9. 
Pred, Alan. 1997. ‘Re-presenting the Extended Present Moment of Danger: A Medita-
tion on Hypermodernity, Identity and the Montage Form’ in Benko and 
Strohmayer (1997): 117-138. 
Rapport, Nigel. 1995. ‘Migrant Selves and Stereotypes: Personal Context in a Post-
modern World’ in Pile and Thrift (1995): 267-283. 
Ridon, Jean-Xavier. 2000. ‘Introduction’ in Ridon, Jean-Xavier (ed.). Nottingham 
French Studies 39 (1): 1-6. 
Robbins, Derek. 2000. Bourdieu and Culture [1999]. London: Sage. 
Roberts, Adam. 2000. Fredric Jameson. London and New York: Routledge. 
Robertson, George et al. (eds). 1994. Travellers' Tales: Narratives of Home and Dis-
placement. London: Routledge. 
Robin, Régine. 1989. Le Roman mémoriel: de l’histoire à l’écriture du hors-lieu. 
Montréal: Les Editions du Préambule. 
–– 1993a. Le Deuil de l’origine: Une langue en trop, la langue en moins. Paris: Pres-
ses universitaires de Vincennes. 
–– 1993b. ‘L’Autofiction: Le sujet toujours en défaut’ in Doubrovsky, Serge, Jacques 
Lecarme and Philippe Lejeune (eds). Autofictions et cie. Paris: Université de 
Paris X: 73-86. 
–– 1994. L’Amour du Yiddish: écriture juive et sentiment de la langue (1830-1930). 
Paris: Editions du Sorbier. 
–– 1995a. Le Naufrage du siècle suivi de Le Cheval blanc de Lénine ou l’Histoire au-
tre [1979]. Paris and Montreal: Berg International.

Bibliography 
308 
–– 1995b. ‘Le Sujet de l’écriture’ in Trans (Winter 1995), 97-114. 
–– 1997a. Le Golem de l’écriture: de l’autofiction au Cybersoi. Montréal: XYZ. 
–– 1997b. ‘Le Virtuel et l’historicité. De la matrice à la matrix?’ in Chiantaretto 
(1997): 133-144. 
–– 1998. ‘Traumatisme et transmission’ in Chiantaretto (1998): 115-131. 
–– 1999b. ‘Figer la mémoire allemande dans le béton?’ in Le Monde (12 février 
1999). 
–– 2000a. ‘Présentation: Internet et littérature’ in Etudes françaises 36 (2): 5-9. 
–– 2000b. ‘Le Texte cyborg’ in Etudes françaises 36 (2): 11-38. 
–– 2001a. Berlin Chantiers: Essai sur les passés fragiles. Paris: Stock. 
–– 2000-2001b. ‘Trou de mémoire: le travail de la judéité’ in Les Temps Modernes 
611-612 (December 2000-Febuary 2001) : 192-209. 
–– 2001c. ‘Vous! Vous êtes quoi vous au juste? Méditations autobiographiques autour 
de la judéité’ in Etudes françaises 37 (3): 111-125. 
‘Régine Robin: La Chiffonière de l’Histoire’. On line at http://www.telequebec.qc.ca/ 
idees/chasseurs_idees_1999/archives/20001203/theme.html (consulted 12.1. 
2002). 
Robinson, Christopher. 1995. Scandal in the Ink: Male and Female Homosexuality in 
Twentieth Century French Literature. London: Cassell. 
Rodaway, Paul. 1995. ‘Exploring the Subject in Hyper-reality’ in Pile and Thrift 
(1995): 241-266. 
Rollet, Brigitte and James S. Williams. 1998. ‘Visions of Excess: Filming/Writing the 
Gay Self in Collard’s Savage Nights’ in Heathcote et al. (1998): 193-208. 
Rose, Gillian. 1996. ‘As if the Mirrors had Bled: Masculine Dwelling, Masculinist 
Theory and Feminist Masquerade’ in Duncan (1996): 56-74. 
Rosello, Mireille. 1997a. ‘Contamination et pureté: pour un protocole de cohabitation’ 
in L’Esprit créateur 37 (3): 3-13. 
–– 1997b. ‘The National-Sexual: From the Fear of Ghettos to the Banalization of 
Queer Practices’ in Fisher and Schehr (1997): 246-271. 
Rushdie, Salman. 1991. Imaginary Homelands. London: Granta. 
Rutherford, Jonathan (ed). 1990a. Identity: Community, Culture, Difference. London: 
Laurence and Wishart. 
–– 1990b. ‘A Place Called Home: Identity and the Cultural Politics of Difference’ in 
Rutherford (1990): 9-27. 
Rybczynski, Witold. 1986. Home: A Short History of an Idea. New York, Middlesex, 
Ontario and Auckland: Viking Penguin. 
Sabatier, Renée. 1988. Blaming Others: Prejudice, Race and Worldwide AIDS. Lon-
don: Panos Publications. 
Said, Edward. 1990. ‘Yeats and Decolonialization’ [1988] in Nationalism, Colonial-
ism and Literature [1977]. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Sarkonak, Ralph. 1987. ‘The Text as Crossroads’ in Canadian Literature 112: 100-
102. 
–– 1996. ‘Traces and Shadows: Fragments of Hervé Guibert’ in Yale French Studies 
90: 172-204. 
–– (ed.). 1997a. Le Corps textuel de Hervé Guibert. Paris: Revue des lettres moder-
nes. 
–– 1997b. ‘Une histoire de corps’ in Sarkonak (1997a): 5-22.

Bibliography 
309 
Sarup, Madan. 1988. An Introductory Guide to Poststructuralism and Postmodernism. 
London: Harvester Wheatsheaf. 
–– 1994. ‘Home and Identity’ in Robertson et al. (1994): 93-104. 
Saveau, Patrick. 1999. ‘Doubrovsky’s Autofictions and the Holocaust: An Oxymo-
ron?’ in Rendezvous 34 (1): 25-35. 
Saxton, Arnold. 1995. ‘AIDS and Death’ in L’Esprit créateur 35 (4): 104-106. 
Schehr, Lawrence R. 1994. ‘Hervé Guibert under Bureaucratic Quarantine’ in 
L’Esprit créateur 34 (1): 73-82. 
–– 1996. Alcibiades at the Door: Gay Discourses in French Literature [1995]. Stan-
ford: Stanford University Press. 
–– 1997. ‘Jus’ in Sarkonak (1997a): 213-228. 
Schwartz, Marcy E. 1999. Writing Paris: Urban Topographies of Desire in Contem-
porary Latin American Fiction. New York: State University of New York 
Press. 
Seidman, Steven (ed.). 1994. The Postmodern Turn: New Perspectives on Social The-
ory. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Sharp, Joanne P. 1996. ‘Gendering Nationhood: A Feminist Engagement with Na-
tional Identity’ in Duncan (1996): 97-108. 
Shek, Ben-Z. 1991. French-Canadian and Québécois Novels. Toronto, Oxford and 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
Sheringham, Michael (ed.). 1996. Parisian Fields. London: Reaktion Books. 
Sherry, Michael S. 1993. ‘The Language of War in AIDS Discourse’ in Murphy and 
Poirier (1993): 39-51. 
Shields, Rob. 1997. ‘Spatial Stress and Resistance: Social Meanings of Spatialization’ 
in Benko and Strohmayer (1997a): 186-197. 
Silverman, Max. 1999. Facing Postmodernity: Contemporary French Thought on 
Culture and Society. London: Routledge. 
Simon, Sherry. 2001. ‘A.M. Klein et Karl Stern: Le scandale de la conversion’ in Etu-
des françaises 37 (3): 53-67. 
Smethurst, Paul. 1997. ‘There is No Place Like Home: Belonging and Placelessness in 
the Postmodern Novel’ in Norquay and Smyth (1997): 373-384. 
Smith, Neil, and Cindi Katz. 1996. ‘Grounding Metaphor: Towards a Spatialized Poli-
tics’ in Keith and Pile (1996): 67-80. 
Smith, Sidonie, and Julia Watson (eds). 1992. De/Colonizing the Subject: The Politics 
of Gender in Women’s Autobiography. Minneapolis: Minnesota University 
Press. 
Smyth, Edmund. 1995. ‘Des Aveugles: Modes d’articulation’ in Nottingham French 
Studies 34 (1): 8-14. 
Sontag, Susan. 1979. ‘Introduction’ in Benjamin (1979): 7-28. 
Sontag, Susan. 1988. AIDS  and its Metaphors. London: Penguin. 
Tester, Keith (ed.). 1994. The Flâneur. London: Routledge. 
Thacker, Andrew. 2003. Moving Through Modernity: Space and Geography in Mod-
ernism. Manchester and New York: Manchester University Press. 
Thibault, Bruno. 2000. ‘Errance et initiation dans la ville post-moderne: de la guerre 
(1970) à poisson d’or (1997) de J.M.G. Le Clézio’ in Nottingham French Stu-
dies 39 (1) : 96-109. 
Thompson, Dawn. 2001. ‘Vital Fictions’ in Canadian Literature 168 (Spring 2001): 
167-169.

Bibliography 
310 
Timms, Edward and David Kelley (eds). 1985. Unreal City: Urban Experience in 
Modern European Literature and Art. Manchester: Manchester University 
Press. 
Tomas, David. 1996. Transcultural Space and Transcultural Beings. Boulder: West-
view Press. 
Treichler, Paula. 1988. ‘AIDS, Homophobia and Biomedical Discourse: An Epidemic 
of Signification’ in Crimp (1988): 31-70. 
Tuan, Yi-Fu. 2003. Space and Place: The Perspective of Experience [1977]. Minnea-
polis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Vergole, Antoine. 1970. ‘Foreword’ in Lemaire (1970): XVI-XXII. 
Virilio, Paul. 1994. L'Inertie polaire [1990]. Paris: Christian Bourgois. 
Walzer, Michael. 1986. ‘Pleasures and Costs of Urbanity’ in Kasinitz (1986): 320-
330. 
Watney, Simon. 1989. Policing Desire: Pornography, AIDS and the Media [1987]. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
–– 1990a. ‘The Rhetoric of AIDS’ in Boffin and Gupta (1990): 7-18. 
–– 1990b. ‘Representing AIDS’ in Boffin and Gupta (1990): 165-192. 
Weeks, Jeffrey. 1990. ‘Post-Modern AIDS?’ in Boffin and Gupta (1990): 133-141. 
–– 1991. Against Nature: Essays on History, Sexuality and Identity. London: Rivers 
Oram. 
Westwood, Sallie, and John Williams (eds). 1997. Imagining Cities: Scripts, Signs, 
Memory [1996]. London: Routledge. 
White, Kenneth. 1991. ‘Présentation du Colloque’ in Géographie de la culture: espa-
ce, existence, expression. Nîmes: Cahiers de Géopoétique, série colloques. 
Williams, Raymond. 1973. The Country and the City. London: Chatto and Windus. 
― 1976. Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society. London: Croom Helm. 
Wilson, Elizabeth. 1992a. The Sphinx in the City: Urban Life, the Control of Disorder 
and Women [1991]. London: Routledge. 
–– 1992b. ‘The Invisible Flâneur’ in New Left Review 191 (February 1992): 92-110. 
Winn, Phillip. 1997. ‘Personal Suspects and the Framing of Africa: Who’s to Blame 
for AIDS?’ in Mots Pluriels 3 (1): 1-8. 
Wolff, Janet. 1990. Feminine Sentences: Essays on Women and Culture. Oxford: 
Blackwell. 
Worton, Michael, and Judith Still. 1993. Intertextuality: Theories and Practices 
[1990]. Manchester: Manchester University Press. 
Worton, Michael. 1997. ‘En (D)écrivant le corps, en imaginant l’homme, le ‹vrai 
corps› de Guibert’ in Sarkonak (1997a): 63-77. 
Wright, Elizabeth. 1984. Psychoanalytic Criticism: Theory in Practice. London and 
New York: Methuen. 
Yorke, Liz. 1997. Adrienne Rich: Passion, Politics and the Body. London: Sage. 
Zanone, Damien. 2000-2001. ‘Le Ressassement de Laissé pour conte: crise et vérité 
du « système S.D. »’ in Les Temps modernes 611-612 : 167-178. 
Zuccotti, Susan. 1993. The Holocaust, The French and the Jews. New York: Basic 
Books.

Index 
 
 
Africa 19, 44, 144, 174-179, 245-
246, 283-284, 288, 292 
AIDS 88-89, 111-113, 115, 117-118, 
121-124, 143-146, 149-154, 
156, 158-164, 167, 169, 171-
180, 183, 190, 223, 262-264, 
281-282, 288-292; Geo-
cultural mythologies of ori-
gins of AIDS 174-175, 178, 
292 
Akeret, Robert U. 103 
Anderson, Benedict 28 
Anti-Semitism 183, 190, 192-194, 
200, 202 217, 228-229, 233 
Antle, Martine 169-170, 262 
Apter, Emily 53, 111, 147, 163 
Ashcroft, Bill 79 
Augé, Marc 26-28, 33, 44, 58, 242, 
250 
Autobiography 20-21, 90-97, 99, 101-
105, 109-110, 116, 126, 129, 
131, 135, 138-140, 256, 260-
261; Autobiographical pact 
92, 98, 130-134, 137, 139 
Autofiction 21, 90, 95-110, 119-124, 
126, 130, 141, 145-150, 152-
167, 175-217, 220, 230, 233, 
255-274, 281-289, 292-293; 
Roman faux 119 
 
Bachelard, Gaston 19, 53-56, 77-78, 
81-82, 84, 205 
Baillie, Kate 147 
Barker, Chris 24, 56-58, 230 
Barnes, Trevor J. 65, 70 
Baudelle, Yves 81-82 
Baudrillard, Jean 33, 39 
Benjamin, Walter 74-78, 81, 84, 155 
Benko, Georges 24, 31, 36, 40, 43, 57 
Bhabha, Homi K. 45 
Bianciotti, Hector 115 
Biasi, Pierre-Marc de 76 
Blunt, Alison 62, 63 
Body, the 42, 49-52, 59-60, 68-69, 
73, 114-115, 145, 150-164, 
167-173, 178-180, 192-195, 
202-203, 205, 267-268, 281-
283, 286-287, 289, 291; Body 
and Space 59, 150, 152-154, 
157, 171, 179-180, 192, 194, 
267, 291 
Boulé, Jean-Pierre 112, 115, 117-122, 
146, 158, 261-262, 286 
Bourdieu 148, 151, 196; cultural capi-
tal 148-149, 151, 196, 293 
Braudeau, Michel 123 
Brosseau, Marc 18, 70-72, 74, 77, 80, 
82, 84-85 
Buisine, Alan 114, 170, 289 
Buot, François 115-116 
Burgelin, Claude 91 
 
Caron, David 167-168 
Carter, Paul 79 
Cartography 42, 62, 64, 66, 79, 82; 
postmodern cartography 21, 
69, 85, 140-141, 253-256, 
264, 269-272, 277-281, 285, 
289-290, 294 
Caviedes, Cesar 73 
Certeau, Michel de 68-69, 183-187 
Chambers, Iain 52 
Chapman, Rosemary 130, 223, 226, 
229, 240, 247, 274 
Chard-Hutchinson, Martine 198 
Chevalier, Anne 74 
Chiantaretto, Jean-François 97, 133, 
183, 208-209, 215

Index 
312 
City see Paris, Montréal 
Claval, Paul 24, 51, 65 
Clifford, James 26, 29, 33, 45, 57-58, 
249-250, 264-265 
Cohn-Sherbok, Dan 234 
Cohn-Sherbok, Lavina 234 
Confinement 158-170, 178, 184, 193, 
200-205, 217 
Conley, Tom 81 
Contat, Michel 96-108, 181 
Cosgrove, Denis 40, 62, 65 
Cosmopolitanism 238-239, 244-246, 
274 
Crimp, Douglas 144 
Crow, Dennis 24 
Cultural contact zones 29, 240 
Cultural geography 18-19, 64-65, 70-
71; New Cultural Geography 
5, 18-19, 64-65, 70-71 
 
Daniels, Stephen 65 
Darrieussecq, Marie 115-117 
Davis, Mike 49, 240 
Dear, Michael 43, 60, 66, 266 
Décarie, Isabelle 234 
Delon, Michel 90-91, 93 
Dicken, Peter 27, 44, 70, 254 
Domosh, Mona 40, 62 
Doubrovsky, Serge 21, 53, 60, 88-
119, 124, 126, 140-141, 180-
223, 228-231, 255-274, 281, 
283, 285, 289-293; Fils 97, 
99, 104-109, 182-197, 201-
205, 210-215, 265-267; La 
Dispersion 99, 106-107; 
Laissé pour conte 99, 102, 
106, 110, 184-195, 199-203, 
207-208, 213, 257, 260, 270; 
L’Après-Vivre 100, 110, 185-
186, 196, 205-208, 213-214, 
268, 270-271; La Vie, l’in-
stant 99, 107: Le Livre brisé 
99-109, 184-185, 189-193, 
196-201, 205-208, 212, 257, 
269-271; Un amour de soi 99-
109, 182-186, 195, 197, 201-
206, 213, 257, 265-269 
Dubois, Jacques 239 
Duncan, James S. 61-65, 70 
Duncan, Derek 147, 287 
Duncan, Nancy 48, 55, 152 
 
Eagleton, Terry 31, 35, 37, 49-50 
Eakin, Paul John 97 
Edelman, Lee 144, 263 
Egan, Susanna 20 
Epps, Brad 146, 158, 284, 288 
Entre-deux 188, 199, 205, 208, 215, 
230-231, 236 
 
Flâneur 75, 81, 155 
Foucault, Michel 19, 23, 25, 49, 82, 
111, 117, 147, 159, 168, 183, 
192, 258 
France 19, 32-33, 65, 90, 111, 124, 
136, 140-141, 147, 156, 172, 
175-176, 183, 186-201, 206-
217, 221, 223, 228, 232, 237, 
246, 264, 268, 271, 293 
 
Gaffney, Phyllis 77 
Gascoigne, David 77, 82 
Gaussen, Frederic 111 
Gauvin, Lise 260 
Genette, Gerard 82, 98 
Genre 18, 43, 88, 91-95, 99-105, 109, 
118, 129-131, 137, 219, 256-
257, 264, 269, 272, 287-288; 
generic status 85, 90, 107-
108, 111, 118-124, 127, 130, 
132, 134, 137-139, 145, 223, 
279, 281, 288 
Geography 15, 18-20, 24-25, 30, 43-
44, 62-65, 69-74, 77, 80-84, 
267, 295 
Gilloch, Graeme 74 
Gilmore, Leigh 93-94 
Gilroy, Paul 29, 52, 80 
Griffiths, Gareth 79 
Grosz, Elizabeth 152, 267 
Guibert, Hervé 21, 53, 60, 88-89, 97, 
111-124, 140-180, 190, 196, 
222-223, 255-264, 281-294; A 
l’ami qui ne m’a pas sauvé la 
vie 111-121, 146-152, 156-
158, 162-163, 171, 174-282;

Index 
313 
Cytomégalovirus 112, 118, 
121-124, 145, 150, 159, 161, 
167, 169, 288; Des Aveugles 
115, 119; Fou de Vincent 123; 
L’homme au chapeau rouge 
111, 114, 118-122, 145-149, 
156-157, 160, 163-166, 169-
171, 177-178, 284-285; 
L’Incognito 116-117; Les 
Gangsters 116; Le Paradis 
118, 122-124, 145, 283, 288-
289; Le Protocole compas-
sionnel 111-122, 146-150, 
153-155, 160-162, 165-172, 
176-179, 282-286; Mes Par-
ents 116 
 
Harel, Simon 229, 233-239, 242-243, 
248, 275, 279 
Harvey, David 29, 32, 37 
Heathcote, Owen 147-148, 163 
Helms, Gabriele 20 
Higonnet, Margaret R. 77, 79 
Hill, Leslie 157, 286 
Hillis, Ken 52 
Holocaust 15, 88, 125-129, 134, 137, 
161-164, 219-222, 234, 243, 
246-249, 261, 278, 280, 293 
Home Space 30, 53-56, 84-85, 140-
141, 164, 170-173, 179-187, 
201, 217, 220-232, 236, 240-
243, 247-251, 278, 283, 291-
294 
Hornung, Alfred 140 
Huggan, Graham 79 
Hughes, Alex 93-94, 96-97, 102-103, 
106, 110, 148, 150, 158-159, 
164-165, 206, 260, 287 
 
Interdisciplinary 24-25, 39, 69, 72, 
74-76, 79, 81-83, 295 
Ireland, John 98, 104-105, 256, 266, 
284 
 
Jaccomard, Hélène 92, 106, 108, 117, 
208 
Jackson, Peter 17 
Jameson, Fredric 17, 23-26, 29-39, 
43, 53, 60, 67, 253, 275 
Jarvis, Brian 65-67, 253-254 
Jewish 88, 99, 124-127, 131, 135, 
139, 189, 191, 193-195, 201-
203, 219-227, 230, 234-237, 
243, 261, 292-293 
Jouan-Westlund, Annie 98, 103, 105, 
207 
Jourde, Pierre 74 
 
Kaluszyn 224-227, 232, 243 
Kaplan, Caren 28-29, 46, 56, 94-95 
Karancheti, Indira 42, 78 
Katz, Cindi 24-25, 46 
Kedward, H.R. 190 
Keith, Michael 17, 25, 38, 41 
Kennedy, Stanislaus 54, 149, 225 
Kirby, Kathleen M. 47, 190 
Knox, Paul 49 
Kofman, Eleanore 32 
 
Labyrinth 267-268, 282-283, 289 
Lacan, Jacques 209-211, 214-216 
Language 24-25, 56, 61, 90, 94, 102-
104, 115-116, 125-126, 133, 
140, 144, 161, 173, 188-189, 
210-211, 215-216, 226, 230, 
258-264, 270, 272, 278 
Laouyen, Mounir 95 
Lash, Scott 39 
Lavastine-Laignel, Alexandra 279 
Lebas, Elizabeth 32 
Lee, Dennis 79 
Lehan, Richard 48, 74-75 
Lejeune, Philippe 87, 90-93, 102-103 
Lemaire, Anika 210-212, 214 
Lévy, Bertrand 78 
Lévy, Clara 188-189, 261 
Ley, David 61-65 
Liberation 184, 200-205 
Life Writing 15, 18-21, 53, 67, 69, 
84-105, 112-113, 127-128, 
130-132, 140-141, 181-184, 
219, 251, 254-257, 260-264, 
281, 291, 294-295; French 
Life Writing 15, 19; Twenti-
eth Century Life Writing 291

Index 
314 
Literary Studies 15, 18-20, 24, 30, 69-
70, 74-84, 295 
Lloyd, Peter E. 27, 44, 70, 254 
Louette, Jean-François 96-98, 100-
101, 106-107 
Lucy, Niall 30, 33-34, 36, 39, 256-
259, 263 
Lupton, Deborah 160-161 
Lyotard, Jean-François 35-37, 40, 50 
 
Magnan, Lucie-Marie 33, 259-263 
Mallory, William E. 72-73, 258 
Map, mapping 17, 21, 25, 27, 42-43, 
62-63, 66-69, 75, 77, 79, 81-
82, 141, 165, 184-186, 198, 
200, 253-255, 264, 268-272, 
276-278, 285, 289, 294 
Marangoly George, Rosemary 53, 55, 
97 
Marcuse, P. 49 
Marks, Laura U. 28, 235-236 
Marrus, Michael R. 183, 190-191 
Martel, Frédéric 115-116, 150 
Massey, Doreen 41-42, 57 
McDowell, Linda 52 
McElroy, Ruth 56 
Medical Space 159, 162, 166-169 
Miguet-Ollagnier, Marie 198-199 
Mills, Sara 79-80 
Minh-ha, Trinh T. 56, 81 
Mitchell, Kenneth 73 
Montreal 124, 131, 135, 222, 227, 
232-247, 251, 273-276 
Montremy, Jean-Maurice de 98 
Morin, Christian 259-260, 263 
Moretti, Franco 82 
Morley, David 27-28, 44, 47 
Moruzzi, Norma Claire 173 
Murphy, Richard 34, 140, 258 
 
Nast, Heidi J. 50, 67, 152, 267 
Nepveu, Pierre 235, 267, 277 
Ning, Wang 34-35 
Non-lieux, non-places 26, 223, 242, 
250-252, 294 
Nora, Pierre 184, 266, 270 
Norquay, Glenda 24, 82 
 
Occupation of Paris 88, 100, 125, 
135, 190, 194, 197, 201, 229, 
292 
 
Pagès, Jean-Luc 104 
Paris 74-78, 80, 99, 111, 123, 125-
126, 131, 135, 146-160, 165-
173, 176, 179-180, 184-187, 
194, 196-197, 199, 202, 205-
207, 211, 215, 217, 223, 227-
236, 239-247, 250-251, 265, 
267, 273-274, 278, 281, 291-
293 
Parker, Geoffrey 42 
Parr, Hester 38 
Parsons, Deborah 75-76 
Pasquali, Adrien 80 
Paxton, Robert D. 183, 190-191 
Peach, Linden 20, 25, 29, 41, 82-83 
Peet, Richard 34, 36, 43 
Petersen, Alan 192-193 
Philo, Chris 38 
Pibarot, Annie 93 
Pile, Steve 17, 25, 38, 41, 50, 52-53, 
58, 67-69, 254, 267 
Poirier, Suzanne 144 
Poland 88, 125, 135-136, 222, 224 
Postcolonial 94, 241, 276 
Postcolonialism 28, 44, 78-81, 277 
Postmodernism 18-20, 29-40, 43-50, 
53, 59-66, 91, 94-95, 140, 
253, 256-267, 272-277, 280, 
284, 289, 294 
Postmodern Cartography see Carto-
raphy 
Postmodern Literature 256-259, 263 
Postmodern representational practices 
60 
Postmodern Space 40, 43, 46-47, 51-
52, 60, 63-69, 83, 85, 141, 
253, 255, 264, 268, 273, 275, 
281, 284; Urban space 23, 77, 
223, 227, 236, 274-275 
Pratt, Mary Louise 29, 80, 240 
Pratt, Murray 116, 169-172, 287-289 
Pred, Alan 31, 64 
Psychoanalysis 103-104, 181, 209-
210, 214-217, 269, 280

Index 
315 
Quebec 19, 33, 124-126, 131, 237, 
241, 273-276 
 
Ridon, Jean-Xavier 48 
Robbins, Derek 148 
Roberts, Adam 37-38 
Robertson, George 80 
Robin, Régine 21, 53, 60, 87-89, 97, 
104, 124-141, 182-185, 191, 
194, 197-199, 206, 219-264, 
270-281, 285, 289-291, 294; 
La Québécoite 126, 130-133, 
219-250, 257, 273-278; L’Im-
mense fatigue des pierres 
133-137, 220-225, 228-236, 
242-251, 273, 276-278; Pa-
piers perdus 137, 139, 219-
233, 251, 260-261, 273-274, 
278-279 
Robinson Christopher 114, 286 
Rodaway, Paul 33, 35, 63 
Rollet, Brigitte 288 
Roots/Routes 46, 52, 249, 265, 273 
Rose, Gillian 25-26, 62-63 
Rushdie, Salman 87 
Rutherford, Jonathan 51-52 
Rybczynski, Witold 54-55 
 
Sabatier, Renée 144-145, 157 
Salmon, Tim 147 
Sarkonak, Ralph 114-119, 131, 152, 
233, 236, 264, 276, 286 
Sarup, Madan 51-52, 210, 264 
Saveau, Patrick 107, 191, 198, 210 
Schehr, Laurence R. 118, 261-262 
Schwartz, Marcy E. 76, 155 
Second World War 70, 88, 100, 125, 
127-129, 132, 134-135, 147, 
183, 201-204, 219, 224-233, 
236, 251, 261, 276, 278, 292-
293 
Seidman, Steven 36, 38-39, 59, 61 
Sharp, Joanne P. 175 
Sheringham, Michael 76-77, 185 
Sherry, Michael S. 161-162 
Shields, Rob 24-25, 40-41, 43 
Shoah (see Holocaust) 127 
Le sida (see AIDS/Aids) 179-284 
Silverman, Max 19, 89, 261 
Simpson-Housley, Paul 73, 258 
Smethurst, Paul 44, 51 
Smith, Neil 24-25, 46 
Smith, Sidonie 18 
Smyth, Edmund 119 
Smyth, Gerry 24 
Sontag, Susan 75, 144, 174 
Space (see postmodern space, home 
space, body and space) 23-24, 
41, 78, 82 
Still, Judith 198 
Strohmayer, Ulf 24, 40, 43 
 
Tester, Keith 155 
Thacker, Andrew 23, 55 
Thibault, Bruno 48 
Thompson, Dawn 133, 278 
Thrift, Nigel 25, 50-53, 58, 68, 254, 
267 
Tiffin, Helen 79 
Tomas, David 29 
Transport 17, 26-27, 44, 68, 154, 253, 
281 
Travel 26, 28-29, 44-47, 51-52, 56, 
58, 69, 150, 154-156, 158, 
171-174, 176-178, 203, 205, 
212, 222, 247, 249-251, 273, 
285, 289, 292 
Travel writing 79-81 
Treichler, Paula 143-144 
Tuan, Yi-Fu 23 
 
Urry, John 39 
United States of America 136, 141, 
144, 175-178, 183, 186, 191, 
194-200, 203, 206, 208, 210, 
212-217, 222-223, 234, 264-
265, 268, 271, 293 
 
Vergole, Antoine 210, 216 
Virilio, Paul 47, 52, 57, 59 
 
Walzer, Michael 49 
Wayfinding 68-69, 254-255, 272 
Weeks, Jeffrey 262-263 
White, Kenneth 78 
Williams, Raymond 51

Index 
316 
Williams, James S. 147-148, 288 
Wilson, Elizabeth 48 
Winn, Phillip 179 
Worton, Michael 152, 198, 262 
Wright, Elizabeth 209-210 
 
Yorke, Liz 59