8 1
open house international Vol 34, No.3, September 2009  Being at Home: Space for Belonging in a London Caff
BEING AAT HHOME: EEXPLORING AAN
INTIMATE M
MODE O
OF BBELONGING   
This paper explores the relationship between not
only transnational and local identity, but also an
intimate sense of belonging; the space in which
people become know to one another, the space in
which they feel at home. Within a South London
caff, experiences of belonging span the vast dis-
tance of the global migrations of diverse people
into cities, down to which table a local customer
feels comfortable to regularly sit at. This Open
House issue examines interpretations of home
alongside the process of migration, and I start with
Massey's critical question, "whose identity we are
referring to when we talk of a place called home
and the supports it may provide of stability, oneness
and security?" (1994:167). To relate questions of
'whose identity?', 'whose home?' and 'whose stabili-
ty?', I explore the altered experiences of home in the
rapidly changing context of London, through how
both 'newcomers' and 'established' residents recon-
stitute their understandings of belonging, with
respect to one another. By focusing on the overlap-
ping spaces in the everyday lives of migrants and
established residents, I seek to avoid the separation
of urban citizens into discreet social categories;
either the "homogenous construction" of 'migrant'
(Al-Ali and Koser, 2002:preface) or the static con-
ceptualisation of 'community' as fixed to origin or
location. 
I relate experiences of 'being at home'
between individuals and groups in Nick's Caff, a
local meeting place off a multi-ethnic street in
South London, and draw on ethnographic observa-
tions developed over a ten-month period to
emphasise experiences of urban change. I focus on
how the Caff is ordered by space, time, and social
etiquette, allowing for different individuals and
groups to appropriate the Caff by claiming places
to sit within the rhythm of the day, while participat-
ing in the performances that regulate conversation,
eye contact, intimacy and distance. I explore how
experiences of belonging fluctuate both for the
established resident and the newcomer, all of
whom, in the context of deep urban change, must
deal with notions of being in-place and at home
and mis-placed or foreign. The experiences of
being at home within the Caff are framed through
an intimate sense of belonging that emerges out of
sustained social interaction, regularly repeated as
part of day-to-day and face-to-face meetings.
In this paper I expand on the social process
of being at home, by defining three related modes
for interaction: space, practice and sociability. My
Suzanne M. Hall
Abstract
This paper relates migration and home through the experiences of belonging negotiated by both newcomers and
established residents in a South London caff. My account emerges out of an ethnographic exploration of Nick's Caff,
a small meeting place off a multi-ethnic, inner city Street. Urban change and social diversity are exemplified in the
Walworth Road: a place from which one can hear the chimes of Big Ben and catch glimpses of the London Eye, but
which remains curiously detached from the image of a prestigious city; where remnants of white working-class culture
juxtapose with a variety of cultures brought from across the globalising world; and where emergent cultures are forged
across the difficulties and possibilities of cultural difference. Nick's Caff situates the day-to-day and face-to-face expe-
riences of belonging within a shared space in the contemporary city. This paper explores how different individuals
reconstitute conventional understandings of 'home' and 'family' through inhabiting their regular tables in the Caff. I
expand on 'belonging' as a mode of social interaction through three key ideas: social space, practice and sociability.
I analyse the social and spatial dimensions of everyday interactions in the Caff, and examine whether intermingling
within the Caff produces alternative understandings of belonging, beyond the binaries of insider/outsider or local/for-
eigner. 
Keywords: Belonging, Shared Space, Practice, Sociability.
BEING AAT HHOME: 
Space ffor BBelonging iin aa LLondon CCaff

8 2
Suzanne M. Hall
open house international Vol 34, No.3, September 2009  Being at Home: Space for Belonging in a London Caff
explanatory framework is drawn from two sources
that approach cultural interaction as a lived and
emerging set of relationships, between and
amongst different individuals and groups. My first
point of departure is the perspective of 'vernacular
cosmopolitanism' offered by Bhahba (2004:pref-
ace), as the intermingling of cultures through the
processes of migration and diaspora, as well as the
recognition of the role of migrants and minorities in
developing different ways of belonging within civil
society. Secondly, I relate this idea of vernacular
cosmopolitanism to an ethnographic perspective,
which respects individual voices and narratives as
crucial to understanding the diverse and shifting
experiences of belonging. 
BEING AAT HHOME: SSHARED SSPACE
The emergence of the London caff required the
symbiosis of at least two cultures to forge its quali-
ties for a particular kind of meeting and eating in
the city: the initiation of a casual and affordable
eating establishment brought largely by Italian
immigrants to London in the 1950s; and the take-
up of a local, sociable place by the working-class
to eat home-cooked food away from home
(Heathcoate 2004). The London caff has emerged
across the imaginations of cultures, and across the
Formica tables and accompaniments of malt vine-
gar and brown sauce, it has come to encompass
other migrant and minority groups, including
Greek, Turkish and Cypriot proprietors, and cus-
tomers from a changing working-class, as well as
from changing local areas. Nick's Caff emerged as
a social space out of the initial efforts of Nick's par-
ents who immigrated to London from Cyprus in the
1950s. Since then, the demographics of the local
Walworth population has changed and diversified
considerably, and the Caff is a place in which con-
temporary experiences of difference can be
observed. The loss of public space as places for dif-
ferent people to engage beyond a visual encounter,
features prominently in writings about the contem-
porary western city, (Sennett  1992[1977], 1996).
Writers exploring the relationship between differ-
ence and the public realm in the contemporary city
have also pointed to the location of meeting and
communicating between cultures away from such
overt public spaces, to the smaller spaces of regu-
lar engagement, including schools, workplaces and
youth clubs (Amin 2002). It is in the range of inter-
stitial spaces, neither explicitly public nor private,
Bhabha argues, that inter-cultural social life can be
accommodated and experienced.
To relegate Nick's Caff solely to the status of
an eating establishment would be to overlook its
significant role as a local meeting place, situated
between the public street and his family's home
above the shop. The Walworth Road itself is key to
the story of Nick's Caff, and walking along it was
one is aware of its vitality and diversity. It is an active
street with a large local population within close
walking distance from it, reinforced by the proximi-
ty of a number of social housing estates, as well as
with a broader population passing through this
main connection between South London and the
centre. Since its emergence as a retail street for
small, independent retailers during the late 1800s
(Post Office London Directory Surveys. 1881-1950)
the Walworth Road has provided a home to immi-
grants willing to ply their entrepreneurial skills.
These early Directories provide a record of tailors,
clothiers, cheesemongers and proprietors of
refreshment rooms along the Walworth Road, and
also indicate a mix of proprietors who emigrated
from different places including Greece, Turkey, Italy,
Ireland and Eastern Europe. 
Of broader significance is that, with structur-
al forces such as industrialisation and urbanisation,
colonisation and ultimately globalisation, the cul-
tures participating in the retail life of the Walworth
Road has increased and diversified. In 2006 a col-
league and I undertook a survey of all the inde-
pendent retailers along the Walworth Road. At a
numbers level we learnt that there were a total of
227 units along the mile length of the street. These
units were predominantly retail, with most shop
fronts ranging from 4,5 metres wide for a single
unit, to approximately 9 metres for a double unit,
indicating the small scale and density of the units
that make up this retail strip, as was reflected in the
historic Directory records. We also learnt that just
over 60 per cent of the retail units were indepen-
dent shops, neither belonging to a franchise nor
chain, and that of the 130-odd independent shops,
there were over 20 different countries of origin
amongst the proprietors, with no single place of ori-
gin predominating. 
Nick's Caff is amongst these independent
shops, and provides a base to consider the com-
plexities of how different people belong by coming
together in the city; it is a local place that born-and-
bred 'locals' and a range of 'newcomers' use on a
regular basis and its sociability extends from the sol-
idarity of an extended family of relatives and

8 3
open house international Vol 34, No.3, September 2009  Being at Home: Space for Belonging in a London Caff
Suzanne M. Hall
friends, to the singular practices of diverse individu-
als. The Caff is a fairly old fashioned interior, and
feels almost as if one is stepping into the '60s, when
Nick's Dad first bought the Caff and named it 'The
Istanbul'. There are 16 tables comprised of four
unequal rows and a clear designation through rou-
tine and preference, of who uses which table.
Family and regulars sit up front furthest from the
street, while people who come to the Caff for a
meal or company, but prefer less engagement, tend
to sit at the sides. The positions of the tables and the
fluctuating use of the space throughout the rhythm
of the day, define personal territories within the larg-
er space of the Caff. Through these smaller terrains
it is possible to belong differently: either without
explicit interaction, or with talk limited across the
table, or by joining in with larger conversations
across tables. 
Nick is usually at the front counter adjacent
to the steps leading up to his family's home above
the shop. Behind the counter is a hatch to the
kitchen basement, and a few chalkboard signs of
home-cooked. These include breakfast variations
of chips and eggs, traditional and substantial work-
ing-class food such as steak and kidney pie and
jam roly-poly, as well as daily specials, usually a
roast with potatoes and two veg. The cheapest item
on the menu and one frequently ordered is a mug
of tea, and for 50p a pensioner or those who pop
in during the day, have 'a local', a place to feel at
home. The Caff represents the "small localities"
within the city that Simmel (1949) had associated
more specifically with life in villages and towns.
Simmel related the form of social interaction within
small local areas as dependent on the individual
being known, and thereby located through regular
and direct meetings. It is probable in Simmel's
analysis of small town interaction, that this local
scale of meeting generally occurred between fairly
homogenous groups, whose affinities were not only
defined within the boundaries of a local area, but
also within the boundaries of origin, ethnicity or
class. This account of Nick's Caff raises the question
of the role of the small meeting place within a local
urban area, to incorporate a sense of belonging
amongst different groups and individuals. 
BEING AAT HHOME: PPRACTICE
De Certeau (1984) points us to the social signifi-
cance of how everyday life is lived in the city, plac-
ing value not only on individual experiences, but
also on the cultural accumulation of these experi-
ences when repeated on a regular basis. De
Certeau also emphasises the conscious practice of
engaging with society through habitual activities,
and within Nick's Caff the work practices of Nick
and his wife Dorah, as well as the recreational
practices that their customers employ, fosters levels
of participation in the life of the Caff. The presence
of a regular 'family' group, including Cypriot rela-
tives and local friends that gather around their
shared tables at the front of the Caff has permeat-
ed the sense of place, and has provided a basis for
alternative constitutions of home and family. Mark
who grew up in a small town on the east coast of
England, moved to Walworth ten years ago. He is
in his late forties and runs his own computer busi-
ness. He frequents the Caff daily, often opening his
mail and tending to business while he waits for his
full English breakfast. Although he is known
amongst the regular clientele, he generally sits at
Figure 1. "Sketch of Nick's Caff located between
street and home (Author's fieldwork drawing,
September 2006)

8 4
Suzanne M. Hall
open house international Vol 34, No.3, September 2009  Being at Home: Space for Belonging in a London Caff
the same side table on his own, with a view to the
street.  Mark comments that the presence of family
life in the Caff contributes to his sense of comfort,
"The mix of ages is really good - it's one of the rea-
sons this place feels good - the mix of ages, the
associations with family…It's a family place. Nick's
family are around." Although Mark has children,
they no longer live with him. On many occasions, I
have seen his two children meet up with him at the
Caff, a place they seem comfortable to spend time
in together.
The potential for belonging in the Caff is
reinforced by the presence of Nick and his wife
Dorah, and by the family-like relationships they
have developed with their regulars. As I was leaving
one evening, Dorah was chatting with the evening
regulars about closing the Caff for their two-week
annual holiday. Dorah mentioned her concern for
one of the regulars, Freddie, "He's the only one I
worry about when we go away…when he walks out
of this door every evening, there's no one to go to.
That's it." They carry on chatting and when Freddie
walks in Sonja, a daily regular who has become like
an extended family 'member' to Nick and Dorah
calls out, "You're late, where you been?" Sonja was
born in Walworth and lives a few blocks from the
Caff in one of the social housing estates. She
comes in every morning before work, and returns in
the evening for coffee and conversation. She met
her late husband in Nick's Caff, and it feels like the
Caff, or the front table at least, is Sonja's extended
living room, the place where she socialises with her
family and friends. She is usually joined by her
daughter, and teenage grandson who often does
his homework amidst the chatter of the family table. 
Jack is in his fifties and grew up in and still
lives in Camberwell, an adjacent neighbourhood,
and has also been coming to Nick's for, "Years,
years. Since my divorce, I come here for supper on
my way home. It's very much like a social club.
What you'd call 'caff society' - know what I mean.
Once you've been coming long enough you almost
become Nick's family." There are many individuals
who use the Caff who no longer have an immedi-
ate family or kin as part of their daily socialisation.
The Caff provides a reconstituted 'family' both in
terms of having a place to go to and a people with
whom one feels at home. The sense of Nick's Caff
being a home outside of home and a family outside
of family is underpinned by changing social rela-
tionships and family structures, as well as individual
circumstances, where conventions of home as a
domestic space, and family as relatives, is rede-
fined. 
Not only is the Caff delineated by the layout
of the tables, but by the fluctuating patterns of use
throughout the day. The Caff opens by 7:00 in the
morning and closes approximately twelve hours
later. It is open seven days a week, closing earlier
on Sundays before lunch. The combination of reg-
ular and extended open hours provides a local
place that is consistently available to a diverse
clientele. The rhythm of the Caff across the day
brings both moments of intensity and relative quiet,
a fluctuation in the space in its peak periods com-
pared with its quieter moments. A further critical
dimension of 'caff time' is the possibility of taking
your time. Mustafa is a pensioner who was born in
Guyana and grew up in Brixton. He emphasises the
underlying informality at Nick's Caff as a quality that
allows him to feel relaxed there, "Caffs are better
than restaurants. Restaurants are very formal. You
can take time, eat, have a cigarette. Restaurants
you got to eat your food and get out." Mustafa now
lives in Camberwell, a few bus stops to the south of
Walworth, and arrives at Nick's in his wheelchair
most Wednesday mornings, where he claims his
table close to the entrance.  Key to its appropriation
by its customers, the Caff is a place to go to regu-
larly, either spontaneously or as part of a routine. It
is a place where you can do nothing much without
any sense of being moved on. One may go
through the formality of ordering a cup of tea, but
more importantly the Caff is a space where you can
spend time and take your time. 
Aside from the groups of regulars, there are
individuals who frequent the Caff as part of their
weekly routines. People on piecework away from
home, like Dave who is a forklift operator, use the
Caff periodically as a home-away-from-home
when they work in London. This is where Dave is
assured of a home cooked meal and the comforts
of a traditional Caff environment that for him are a
familiar working-class reference point in a chang-
ing London. Pensioners also have their regular time
slots, many coming in the morning for a fag and
cup of tea, some coming in for a hot meal at lunch
or dinner. Hinga, who left Sierra Leone 12 years
ago, slips into the Caff at the same time most morn-
ings and sits upfront, close to Nick. He always
orders tea and toast, makes limited eye contact,
and glances up to watch the telly, occasionally talk-
ing to Nick. Hinga doesn't partake in any of the
general conversations, and doesn't conform to any
particular groups in the Caff. But this is Hinga's
local place and he reserves his space through the

8 5
open house international Vol 34, No.3, September 2009  Being at Home: Space for Belonging in a London Caff
Suzanne M. Hall
regular act of sitting. In Nick's Caff sitting is a social
practice tied to time and place, where routines and
personal spaces are important dimensions of a
basic mode of belonging. 
BEING AAT HHOME: SSOCIABILITY
Simmel (1949) describes sociability as a social skill
and emphasises the form over the content of
engagement. Such responsive etiquette is acquired
through the repeated processes of sitting, watching
and talking in the Caff, and allows for different peo-
ple to engage differently, from the side spaces
occupied by solitary individuals, to the central
space claimed by an extended family. It is through
regular use of the caff, and not only social or cul-
tural background, that the social codes and eti-
quette become more refined. The social regulations
within the Caff emerge from the practices of pro-
prietor and customers - where regulars sit, where
the loner sits, who talks to whom, and what people
talk about. Caff culture for the most part is convivial
in its nature - different people entering a local
establishment to eat, talk or observe, and there is
little that is conflictual in its inherent sociability. This
is not to say that the Caff is a place without ten-
sions. Like in any 'home' conviviality was at its peak
when occasions contrived to encourage people
with different interests to meet over common
ground. One such event was the Soccer World Cup
2006 and during this period, different individuals
and groups talked over tables and counters, shift-
ing the normal boundaries of individual and group
space. Talking about football in general, before,
during and after the World Cup, provided an entry
point into greeting or conversation across individu-
als, and "See the game last night?" was simply an
easy way of saying hello, or of opening up further
talk. 
The acquisition of social skills also needs to
be extended to how Nick and his family have
engaged with other social networks outside of the
Caff. Nick was 5 or 6 when his dad brought the
shop, "This place (the Caff) was owned by another
Cypriot fella, one thing lead to another. This one
happened to fall in the right place probably
because of it being a Cypriot fella." Nick's Dad
came to London on his own, fifteen years before he
had resources to buy the Caff. His entry into the
Figure 2. The fluctuating rhythms of the Caff  (Author's fieldwork drawing, March 2008)

8 6
Suzanne M. Hall
open house international Vol 34, No.3, September 2009  Being at Home: Space for Belonging in a London Caff
country was by invitation, granted on the basis of a
working permit. 
"When he first came he was in North London.
The restaurant he was working for was in the
area. He had a job in the 'Trocadero'. He
worked up to souse-chef. Then he got lots of
jobs for the other Cypriots. That's what our boys
did. All the foreigners now days work in the
kitchens." 
While Boyd (1989) defines the domestic unit as "a
sustenance unit" and "socialising agent" for migrant
families, Wallman's (1984) research of eight diverse
London households living within the same housing
estate in South London, emphasises the role of
social networks outside of family in supporting fam-
ily mobility. In Nick's Caff, mobility from kitchen to
Caff to professional directions to be pursued by his
daughters has been made through the combined
resources of family effort and imagination, as well
as the support of ethnic networks, which were later
reinforced by local networks. While the Caff is the
first and only workplace for both Nick and Dorah,
they both place great value on education, and have
sought out private education for their daughters'
secondary schooling. The Caff has served as a
financial platform to assist in sending their children
to private schooling, and a combined work-home
base where Nick and Dorah could work extended
hours without being separated from the daily lives
of their children. The acquisition of their social skills
extends from the day-to-day etiquette of 'caff soci-
ety', to ethnic and local networks that support Nick
and Dorah's family, to their recognition of the role
of formal education in enhancing the prospects for
their daughters' mobility, and for a broader extent of
social interaction beyond the caff, and ultimately
beyond family, ethnicity and class.
But while Nick expresses a strong sense of
his Cypriot heritage and equally his local, working-
class sensibilities, his sense of a multiple identity is
complex and reflects an on-going negotiation
between being local and being foreign, or what
Bhabha describes as "the migrant's double vision"
(1994:5). One morning, after six months in the
field, I asked Nick what it was like growing up in the
Walworth area with his Cypriot heritage:
Nick: "I've never faced any racism on the whole,
directly."
Suzi: "Why do you say you're foreign?"
Nick: "'Cos of my colour. The English people
are lovely right. But bottom line is I'm foreign.
And what's worse, I'm a foreigner in my own
country! In many ways our culture is like the
1950s. We've still got the traditional ways, like
being in a time warp. We're old-fashioned,
even our language has stayed the same. They
(Cypriots in Cyprus) see you as English Turks!"
Nick manages his identity between place and
time; between South London and Cyprus, between
his work and social practices in the Caff and his
inheritance of cultural traditions. Within the Caff
there is space for the coexistence of these different
affinities. There are also particular identities that
Nick and others in the Caff relate to, as being more
inclusive of managing these complexities. Defining
oneself through categories that assert an associa-
tion with a way of life, such as "working-class", or a
"South London person" was entirely separate from
being an English national. Being a South Londoner
seemed to partially accommodate contradictions or
was less categorical - like Nick you could live in
London, even be born London, and have strong
connections to another place. Perhaps as a
'Londoner' you could be tied to individual sensibili-
ties, occupations or preferences that are not con-
strained by nationality. In the space of the Caff,
these layered experiences of home are not only
formed by an affinity with origin and kin, but also by
a regular association and engagement with others. 
CONCLUSIONS
A primary question for this paper has been: What
accommodates a sense of home in a context of
urban change? The question has expanded within
Nick's Caff to how 'newcomers' and 'established'
residents are able to be at home with respect to one
another. London is a place where different groups
and individuals gather, and the contemporary
dimensions of gathering in cities is heightened by
the scale and pace of migration. Today the greater
proportion of London's population was either was
born elsewhere, or has parents who were born else-
where (Hamnett 2003). In the context of profound
urban change, experiences of local place, family or
home are neither clear nor stable, and the issue of
how different people are able to belong amongst
one another, is critical. The paradoxical identity of
'the London local' is lived out through various
modes of belonging and this paper has empha-
sised the role of Nick's Caff and the combination of
shared space, practice and sociability as ways of

8 7
open house international Vol 34, No.3, September 2009  Being at Home: Space for Belonging in a London Caff
Suzanne M. Hall
reconstituting home. The Caff is also a meeting
place where conventional understandings of what it
means to belong are contested. What matters is not
that these tensions are necessarily resolved, but that
they encountered and shared. 
I return to Bhabha's concept of vernacular
cosmopolitanism to ask what is different, in this
ethnographic account of social interaction in Nick's
Caff, from the binary distinction between
insider/outsider and foreigner/local. Firstly, the
account is situated in a space of intermingling
across different groups and individuals, where both
the migrant or newcomer and the established resi-
dent or local, share the predicament of being ren-
dered fragile by change. However, it is not only the
predicaments but the possibilities of change that
are shared, and the London caff as a cultural space
born out of the combination of different cultures, is
testimony to this. Secondly everyday life as lived and
practiced allows for a face-to face scale of engage-
ment. In Nick's Caff inclusion happens either in the
fluctuating daily rhythm of the Caff, where individu-
als use the space differently throughout day, or in
the regular and sustained period of meeting over
the years, where family becomes reconstituted on
the basis of regularity and not simply on the basis
of kin. Thirdly belonging occurs as a process, one
not only regulated by class, ethnicity or race, and is
dependent on shared forms of sociability, ranging
from etiquette to social networks.
REFERENCES
AL-ALI, N. & KOSER, K. (eds) 2002, New Approaches to
Migration? Transnational communities and the transforma-
tion of home, Routledge, London
AMIN, A. 2002 ‘Ethnicity and the multicultural city: living
with diversity’ in Environment and Planning A, Vol.34, pp.
959-980
BHABHA, H.K. 2004 [1994], The Location of Culture,
Routledge, London
BOYD, M. 1989 ‘Family and Personal Networks in
International Migration: Recent Developments and New
Agendas’ in International Migration Review, Vol.23, No. 3,
pp. 638-670
DE CERTEAU, M. 1984, The Practice of Everyday Life,
University of California Press, Berkeley
HAMNETT, C. 2003, Unequal City. London in the Global
Arena, Routledge, London
HEATHCOATE, E. 2004, London Caffs, John Wiley and
Sons, London
MASSEY, D. 1994, ‘A Place Called Home?’ in Space, Place
and Gender, Polity Press, Cambridge, pp. 157-173
SENNETT, R. 1992, The Fall of Public Man, W.W. Norton &
Company, New York [first published in 1977]
SENNETT, R. 1996, Flesh and Stone: The Body and the City
in Western Civilization, London, W.W. Norton and
Company, New York
SIMMEL, G. 1949 ‘The Sociology of Sociability’, in The
American Journal of Sociology, 55(3), pp. 254-261
[Translated by Everett C. Hughes]
SIMMEL, G. 1949 ‘Fashion’, in The American Journal of
Sociology, 62(6), 1957, pp. 541-558 [first published in
International Quarterly]
WALLMAN, S. 1984, Eight London Households, Tavistock,
London
Author’s AAddress:
Suzanne M. Hall
Cities Programme, 
London School of Economics,
London WC2A 2AE
s.m.hall@lse.ac.uk