Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin
39(11) 1418­–1427
© 2013 by the Society for Personality
and Social Psychology, Inc
Reprints and permissions: 
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/0146167213499186
pspb.sagepub.com
Article
Prominent thinkers have sometimes characterized human life 
as absurd and meaningless. Yet most people are not paralyzed 
by an existential void or solipsistic nihilism, and many people 
even find life enjoyable and meaningful. Efforts to identify 
what gives meaning to people’s lives have been fruitful, as 
multiple lines of research have provided evidence that social 
relationships are crucial to finding meaning in life (e.g., 
Lambert et al., 2010; Stillman et al., 2009; Williams, 1997, 
2002). In the present investigation, we sought to build on these 
lines of research. Our intent was to identify what it is about 
social relationships that contributes most to making life mean-
ingful. Specifically, we predicted that relationships that pro-
vide a sense of belonging would make life most meaningful.
Belonging
Many theorists have suggested that the human drive for social 
relationships such that forming and maintaining social bonds 
reflects an innate tendency that is adaptive and crucial for sur-
vival (Ainsworth, 1989; Axelrod & Hamilton, 1981; Barash, 
1977; Baumeister & Leary, 1995; Bowlby, 1969; Buss, 1990; 
Moreland, 1987). In fact, there are physical and mental health 
repercussions of failing to form interpersonal attachments 
(for a review, see Baumeister & Leary, 1995). They chose the 
phrase need to belong to describe the pervasive human drive 
to form positive, close attachments. This article has been 
widely cited, and the term need to belong has therefore been 
used as a general term for the desire to form relationships. Of 
course, it is possible to have positive relationships, thereby 
satisfying the need to belong in a general sense, yet still not 
feel that one is fully accepted. In other words, satisfying a 
general need for positive social relationships—for instance, 
by participating in a fraternity or sorority—does not guaran-
tee the subjective experience of belonging. In the present 
investigation, our interest in belonging went beyond whether 
one has positive relationships and extends to the subjective 
experience of having relationships that bring about a secure 
sense of fitting in. We refer to this as having a sense of 
belonging.
Meaning
Viktor Frankl (1946/1963, 1969) proposed that humans are 
driven to find meaning in life, and he termed this motivation 
499186 PSPXXX10.1177/0146167213499186Personality and Social Psychology BulletinLambert et al.
research-article2013
1Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA
2Southern Utah University, Cedar City, USA
3Texas A&M University, College Station, USA
4Karnatak University, Dharwad, Karnataka, India
5Florida State University, Tallahassee, USA
Corresponding Author:
Nathaniel M. Lambert, School of Family Life, Brigham Young University, 
2065 JFSB, Provo, Utah 84602, USA. 
Email: natemlambert@gmail.com
To Belong Is to Matter: Sense of 
Belonging Enhances Meaning in Life
Nathaniel M. Lambert1, Tyler F. Stillman2, Joshua A. Hicks3, 
Shanmukh Kamble4, Roy F. Baumeister5, and Frank D. Fincham5
Abstract
In four methodologically diverse studies (N = 644), we found correlational (Study 1), longitudinal (Study 2), and experimental 
(Studies 3 and 4) evidence that a sense of belonging predicts how meaningful life is perceived to be. In Study 1 (n = 126), we 
found a strong positive correlation between sense of belonging and meaningfulness. In Study 2 (n = 248), we found that initial 
levels of sense of belonging predicted perceived meaningfulness of life, obtained 3 weeks later. Furthermore, initial sense of 
belonging predicted independent evaluations of participants essays on meaning in life. In Studies 3 (n = 105) and 4 (n = 165), 
we primed participants with belongingness, social support, or social value and found that those primed with belongingness 
(Study 3) or who increased in belongingness (Study 4) reported the highest levels of perceived meaning. In Study 4, belonging 
mediated the relationship between experimental condition and meaning.
Keywords
religion, emotion in relationships, forgiveness, attribution, group processes, self-categorization
Received May 19, 2012; revision accepted May 27, 2013

Lambert et al.	
1419
will to meaning. Klinger (1998) argues that “the human brain 
cannot sustain purposeless living,” because all the systems of 
the brain were designed by nature to facilitate meaningful 
thought and action. In the analyses of Frankl and Klinger 
(and those of others, that is, Baumeister, 1991; Johnson, 
1987; Joske, 1974/1981), the drive to find meaning in life is 
a fundamental aspect of human nature.
Some people’s search to find meaning is more fruitful 
than it is for others, as people vary in the extent to which they 
believe their life is meaningful. The belief that one’s life 
lacks meaning is associated with a number of negative men-
tal and physical outcomes, whereas the belief that one’s life 
is full of meaning is associated with a number of positive 
variables (see Steger, 2012, for a comprehensive review). 
The negative consequences of low meaning include psycho-
pathology (Crumbaugh & Maholick, 1964), stress (Mascaro 
& Rosen, 2006), need for therapy (Battista & Almond, 1973), 
suicidal ideation (Harlow, Newcomb, & Bentler, 1986), and 
depression (Debats, van der Lubbe, & Wezeman, 1993; 
Mascaro & Rosen, 2005). In contrast, high levels of meaning 
are associated with good physical health and general well-
being (Reker, Peacock, & Wong, 1987; Wong & Fry, 1998; 
Zika & Chamberlain, 1987, 1992).
How does one measure the extent to which a person has 
found meaning in life? Most often, researchers measure 
meaning by asking participants for a subjective evaluation of 
how meaningful their life is. For instance, some researchers 
have asked participants to indicate their agreement with a 
statement like “My life has a clear sense of purpose” (Steger, 
Frazier, Oishi, & Kaler, 2006). There are merits to this self-
rating approach (Hicks & King, 2009). Most notably, the 
researcher gains insight into participants’ reactions to very 
specific statements. The drawback is that the reliability of 
self-ratings is less than ideal. For instance, a person might 
blithely assert that her life is extremely meaningful, without 
thinking about what constitutes a meaningful life and what 
gives her life meaning.
Articulated Meaning
Presumably, people who have found meaning in life would 
have some insight into why their life is meaningful and what 
gives it meaning. In contrast, people who have found little or 
no meaning in life would presumably struggle to articulate 
why life is meaningful and what gives life meaning. Therefore, 
one way to go beyond the limitations of self-reported mean-
ing is to ask participants open-ended questions about what 
makes their lives meaningful. The responses could then be 
submitted to impartial analysis to quantify one’s capacity to 
articulate meaning. This approach was taken in Study 2.
Sociality and Meaning
Several lines of research have demonstrated that impaired 
social relationships result in a decreased sense of meaning in 
life. Researchers have found that people who are socially 
rejected enter a state of cognitive deconstruction, marked by 
a decrease in meaningful thought (Twenge, Catanese, & 
Baumeister, 2003). Williams (1997, 2002) proposed that 
ostracism thwarts multiple psychological needs, including 
the need for a meaningful existence. Williams and colleagues 
have provided consistent evidence that ostracism challenges 
the ordinary sense that one’s life has meaning (e.g., Sommer, 
Williams, Ciarocco, & Baumeister, 2001; Van Beest & 
Williams, 2006; Williams, Cheung, & Choi, 2000). Recent 
research has demonstrated that discrete exclusion events and 
ongoing feelings of loneliness result in a global reduction of 
meaning in life (Stillman et al., 2009). In sum, impaired 
social relationships result in finding less meaning in life.
Conversely, people commonly associate the presence of 
social relationships with a sense of meaningfulness. When 
asked what constitutes a central meaning in life, the most fre-
quent response refers to personal relationships (Ebersole, 
1998; Klinger, 1977; Little, 1998), which suggests overlap 
between sociality and meaning. Research on elderly persons 
has found that higher levels of social support predict greater 
meaning in life (Krause, 2007). Experimental studies also 
suggest that personal relationships are an important source of 
meaning, as bringing to mind how one acts around “close oth-
ers” promotes a sense of meaning in life, relative to thinking 
about how one acts around “most others” (Schlegel, Hicks, 
King, & Arndt, 2011). Likewise, thinking specifically about 
family relationships prompts higher levels of meaning, rela-
tive to controls (Lambert, Baumeister, Stillman, & Fincham, 
in press; Lambert et al., 2010). In short, close relationships 
are strongly associated with finding meaning in life.
Need to Belong and Meaning
Humans seem to have a biological need for social relation-
ships (e.g., Baumeister & Leary, 1995). Baumeister (2005) 
contends that the human thirst for belonging and the capacity 
to understand large systems of meaning are inextricably 
linked in the human psyche. Therefore, one would expect the 
sense of having a meaningful life to depend, at least in part, 
on a sense of belonging. Some suggest that close relation-
ships offer a symbolic promise of lastingness and continuity 
that provide individuals with a sense of symbolic immortal-
ity (e.g., Lifton, 1979). The symbolic promise of immortality 
may arise insofar as specific close relationships offer the 
framework for biological procreation, allowing individuals 
to live on through their progeny (Mikulincer, Florian, & 
Hirschberger, 2004). Similarly, others propose that close 
relationships allow people to feel a part of a larger symbolic 
entity (e.g., couple or group) that transcends the limitations 
of their own body and expands the capacities and boundaries 
of their own self (Aron, Aron, & Norman, 2001). With regard 
to groups specifically, Hogg suggests that group membership 
helps reduce feeling of subjective uncertainty by “providing 
order and a potential for meaning in otherwise bewildering

1420	
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 39(11)
circumstances.” (Hogg, 2005; see Hogg, 2009). In fact, feel-
ings of belonging in social groups can imbue life with mean-
ing in various ways such as providing stability, helping 
individuals create a shared social identity, and allowing them 
to pursue higher order collective goals (Haslam, Jetten, 
Postmes, & Haslam, 2009; Tajfel, 1978). In any case, satiat-
ing one’s need to belong appears to be important for feeling 
that life is worthwhile and meaningful. Examining this 
hypothesized link between belonging and meaning is the 
objective of this article, with particular attention paid to the 
subjective experience of belonging.
Overview of Studies
Although past research has indicated a relationship between 
social relationships and meaning in life, it is yet unclear 
what about relationships provides meaning. We hypothe-
sized that the sense of belonging is a critical element of 
social relationships that promotes meaning in life. We con-
ducted four methodologically diverse studies to test the 
hypothesis that a subjective sense of belonging promotes 
meaning in life. In Study 1, we used a cross-sectional 
design to conduct an initial test of our hypothesis. The pre-
diction was simply that having relationships that conferred 
a sense of belonging would be positively correlated with 
rating one’s life as meaningful. In Study 2, participants 
were asked to rate their sense of belonging and, 3 weeks 
later, were asked to write an essay about meaning in their 
lives. The essays were independently evaluated, with the 
expectation that a stronger sense of belonging would be 
predictive of the capacity to articulate what makes life 
meaningful. Studies 3 and 4 used experimental designs to 
test whether a sense of belonging caused an increase in 
meaning. Participants were primed with either a sense of 
belonging, feelings of social support, or feelings of social 
value, with the expectation that participants receiving the 
belongingness prime would experience a stronger sense of 
meaning than those in the control conditions. Study 4 also 
tested whether belongingness mediated the relationship 
between experimental condition and meaning.
Study 1
Method
Participants and procedure.  Participants were 141 undergrad-
uate students (118 female) from the United States participat-
ing in the study in exchange for partial course credit. 
Participants completed the study materials online, at a time 
of their choosing.
Measures
Sense of belonging.  Given the dearth of measures cap-
turing the subjective experience of belonging, we created 
a five-item measure that included items such as “There are 
places I can go where I feel like I belong,” and “I feel like 
there are many people with whom I belong.” The reliability 
of the measure was high (α = .81). In a separate sample (n = 
117), this measure was highly correlated with measures we 
expected it to relate to, such as loneliness (r = −.54; Russell, 
1996) and, based on Sociometer Theory (Leary, 2000), self-
esteem (r = .64; Rosenberg, 1965).
Meaning.  To assess meaning, we used the five-item 
Meaning Presence subscale of the Meaning in Life Question-
naire (MLQ; Steger et al., 2006), which assesses the extent to 
which one perceives meaning to be present in one’s life (e.g., 
“I understand my life’s meaning”; α = .94). The other sub-
scale in this measure addresses search for meaning, which 
was not relevant to our specific hypotheses. Also, the Search 
for Meaning subscale has been found to not be strongly 
related to meaning presence (Steger & Kashdan, 2007; Ste-
ger, Oishi, & Kashdan, 2009).
Demographic variables.  We measured age and sex and did 
not find any influence of either of these variables on any of 
the analyses and therefore we did not report the results in the 
analyses below.
Results and Discussion
We expected that sense of belonging would be related to 
higher levels of perceived life meaningfulness. Results con-
firmed our expectations, as belonging was a robust predictor 
of meaningfulness, β = .31, p < .001. We sought to build 
upon this finding using a different way of assessing meaning 
in life.
Study 2
The main purpose of Study 2 was to go beyond self-reports 
of meaning. In the current study, we asked participants to 
articulate what made life meaningful and subsequently sub-
mitted their short essay responses to impartial analysis. Our 
expectation was that people with a weak sense of belonging 
would not only self-rate as having relatively low levels of 
meaning in life but also that independent and impartial 
observers would rate their short essay responses as evincing 
low levels of meaning as well.
Finding an alternative measure of meaning provides more 
than methodological convergence. Self-reported meaning in 
life is a popular and important method in the study of mean-
ingfulness, but there are well-known shortcomings to self-
report measures. For instance, undergraduate research 
participants might casually suggest “Oh sure, my life has 
tons of meaning” without having a clear sense of what that 
meaning is. Hence, the present study asked participants to 
write specifically what meaning their lives have. To be sure, 
an effective response to such a question may require an artic-
ulate thoughtfulness that exceeds the capacity of some

Lambert et al.	
1421
respondents, so it may err in the opposite direction from the 
simple self-report scales. In our view, convergence across 
self-report and essay explanations may provide the method-
ologically strongest means of assessing life’s meaning. A 
second goal of the present study was to replicate the cross-
sectional association observed in Study 1, this time using an 
alternative measure of meaning.
Method
Participants and procedure.  Participants were 248 undergrad-
uates (213 women) from the United States who participated 
in exchange for partial course credit. Participants completed 
a belongingness measure at Time 1, and at Time 2 (3 weeks 
later), they completed measures of meaning.
Measures
Belonging.  To assess perceived sense of belonging, we 
used the five-item measure described in Study 1 that included 
items such as “I feel like there are many people with whom I 
belong.” Cronbach’s alpha was .85.
Articulated meaning.  At Time 2, participants were asked to 
write an essay addressing the questions “Why is life meaning-
ful?” and “What makes your life meaningful?” These essays 
were evaluated by four research assistants (naive to study 
aims), who independently rated participants’ responses. The 
research assistants were instructed to estimate the extent to 
which the essay writer seemed to find his or her life mean-
ingful. Specifically, they were instructed to “rate from 1 (not 
at all)” to “11 (extremely)” how meaningful the essay writer 
thinks his or her life is. Further instructions included ask-
ing raters to try to infer how meaningful the essay writers 
found their own life, rather than imposing raters’ own view 
of a meaningful life on participants. Although few individu-
als cited belongingness directly as a source of meaning in 
their life, most described family relationships and/or friend-
ships with whom they belong, which is consistent with other 
research (Lambert et al., 2010).
There was agreement among the four raters on articulated 
meaning (intraclass correlation coefficient [ICC] = .72), so 
their responses were totaled to create an articulated meaning 
score. In addition, research assistants rated how thoughtful 
the essays were (again from 1 to 11) due to the possibility 
that ratings of low meaning could be due to some partici-
pants putting forth minimal thought and effort into writing 
their essays. We hypothesized that a low sense of belonging 
would be related to an actual inability to articulate a mean-
ingful purpose in life, so our expectation was that belonging-
ness would predict ratings of meaning above and beyond the 
apparent thought put into the essays. Ratings of thoughtful-
ness also demonstrated good reliability, ICC = .85. In short, 
research assistants read each essay and rated it according to 
the apparent degree of meaning in the essay writer’s life 
(termed articulated meaning, which was the main dependent 
variable) and the apparent degree of thought that went into 
the essay (to be used as a covariate).
Self-reported meaning.  One would expect articulated mean-
ing scores to correspond to established self-rating meaning 
scales. To demonstrate the convergent validity of the articu-
lated meaning scores, we used two self-reported meaning 
scales, also obtained at Time 2. Participants completed the 
5-item Meaning Presence subscale of the MLQ that was used 
in Study 1(α = .91; Steger et al., 2006). We also administered 
the 17-item Kunzendorf No Meaning Scale (KNMS; α = .92; 
Kunzendorf & McGuire, 1994; Kunzendorf, Moran, & Gray, 
1995-1996). This scale assesses the extent to which life itself 
is viewed as meaningless (e.g., “Life is a cruel joke” and “It 
does not matter whether I live or die”).
Self-esteem.  Self-esteem was assessed with the Rosenberg 
Self-Esteem Scale (1965). This measure requires individu-
als to report agreement with 10 items that assess self-esteem 
(e.g., “I feel that I have a number of good qualities”). We 
used a 7-point Likert-type response scale from 1 (strongly 
disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). Internal consistency was high 
(α = .88).
Demographic variables.  We measured age and sex and did 
not find any influence of either of these variables on any of 
the analyses, and thus we did not report the results in the 
analyses below.
Results and Discussion
Convergent validity.  Articulated meaning scores corresponded 
to both self-report measures. As one would expect, higher 
presence of self-reported meaning correlated with higher 
articulated meaning scores, r = .28, p < .001. Self-reported 
meaninglessness was associated with lower articulated 
meaning scores, r = −.24, p < .001. The association between 
self-reported meaning and articulated meaning lends credi-
bility to the articulated meaning scores as a measure of 
meaningfulness. It also supports the use of the Steger and 
Kunzendorf self-report scales as valid measures of life’s 
meaning, which should dispel some doubts about relying on 
them as effective tools for assessing how meaningful peo-
ple’s lives are. However, the correlations, although highly 
significant, were not large. The substantial amount of non-
shared variance attests to the value of using both types of 
measure when dealing with a complex and elusive phenom-
enon such as life’s meaningfulness.
Belonging and meaning.  Self-reported sense of belonging had 
the predicted effect on articulated meaning. A stronger self-
reported sense of belonging at Time 1 correlated with higher 
articulated meaning scores at Time 2, r = .30, p < .001. We 
also conducted a partial correlation in which ratings of 
thoughtfulness were partialed out, and sense of belonging

1422	
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 39(11)
still predicted articulated meaning, r = .17, p = .003. Thus, 
people with a strong self-reported sense of belonging are bet-
ter able to articulate meaning in life—to a degree that is 
apparent to independent observers—relative to those with a 
low sense of belonging, and most of this effect is not due to 
any apparent lack of thoughtfulness on the part of those low 
in belonging. Furthermore, self-reported sense of belonging 
still predicted articulated meaning when self-reported self-
esteem was also partialed out, r = .14, p = .02.
Next, we tested whether self-reported sense of belonging 
at Time 1 would predict self-reported meaning at Time 2. 
Consistent with expectations, a strong initial sense of self-
reported belonging predicted high self-reported presence of 
meaning scores (MLQ, r = .41, p < .001), and this remained 
significant even when partialing out self-reported self-esteem 
r = .20, p = .004. Likewise, a strong initial sense of self-
reported belonging was related to lower levels of self-
reported meaninglessness (KNMS, r = −.32, p < .001), which 
also remained significant after controlling for self-reported 
self-esteem r = −.20, p = .005.
Finally, we tested whether the effects of self-reported 
sense of belonging on articulated meaning were at least 
partly independent of self-reported meaning. We conducted a 
hierarchical linear regression on articulated meaning in 
which we entered self-reported meaning presence and self-
reported meaninglessness in Step 1, and then entered self-
reported sense of belonging in Step 2. Results of Step 1 
demonstrated a significant effect for self-reported meaning-
lessness (β = −.16, p = .01) and self-reported meaning pres-
ence (β = .23, p < .001) on articulated meaning. Yet the 
inclusion of self-reported sense of belonging, entered in Step 
2, predicted articulated meaning over and above this, β = .20, 
p = .004. This relationship remained significant when con-
trolling for self-reported self-esteem β = .19, p = .01. This 
indicates that there is an overlap between articulated mean-
ing and self-reported meaning, and also that self-reported 
sense of belonging predicts articulated meaning in a way that 
goes beyond self-reported meaning. It also suggests that the 
essay measure of articulated meaning can add useful infor-
mation above and beyond the Self-Report scales. Future 
research should measure all constructs at both time points to 
test for the temporal stability of the relationships examined 
in the current study.
Study 3
In Study 1, we found a strong correlation between sense of 
belonging and meaning, with strong sense of belonging cor-
responding to high levels of meaning. In Study 2, we found 
that sense of belonging predicted independent evaluations 
of meaningfulness. Study 2 also found that belonging at 
Time 1 predicted later levels of meaning at Time 2. Study 3 
used an experimental design to test the hypothesis that feel-
ings of belongingness cause people to perceive their lives as 
meaningful.
One methodological problem with activating a sense of 
belonging is that one risks activating a host of other impor-
tant variables as well. For instance, if a participant primed 
with a sense of belonging were compared with a participant 
in a neutral control condition, it would be unclear whether 
the (expected) difference in meaning was specifically due to 
a sense of belonging or whether the difference was due to 
the general feeling of having friends. Alternatively, any 
(expected) differences between participants primed with a 
sense of belonging and those in a control condition might be 
due to the positive feelings that stem from thinking about 
people with whom one has a good relationship, rather than 
sense of belonging specifically.
To rule out such competing explanations, all participants 
in the current study were primed with social relationships. 
That is, to provide a rigorous and conservative test of the 
hypothesis that belonging increases perceived meaning in 
life, we primed participants with a sense of belonging, feel-
ings of social support, or a high sense of social value. Hence, 
all three conditions could plausibly increase meaningfulness 
beyond baseline. Indeed, social support does predict mean-
ingfulness (Krause, 2007) as does self-esteem, which is 
related to social value (Baumeister, 1991; Steger & Frazier, 
2005). Nevertheless, we expected that participants primed 
with a sense of belonging would report the highest levels of 
meaning, which would allow the inference that a sense of 
belonging causes an increase in meaning above and beyond 
that which can be explained by general feelings associated 
with having positive relationships.
Method
Participants.  Participants were 105 undergraduate students 
from the United States (49 female) participating in the study 
in exchange for partial course credit.
Procedure.  Materials were completed online. Participants 
were randomly assigned to one of the following three 
conditions.
Sense of belonging condition.  Participants assigned to the 
belonging condition were given the following instructions, 
“Close your eyes and think of two people or groups of people 
with whom you feel that you really belong. Now, write the 
names of the individuals or groups and the type of relation-
ship you have with them.” They were then asked to describe 
each individual (or group), why they felt like they belonged, 
and how it made them feel. Finally, they were asked to write 
a paragraph describing a specific instance when they felt a 
strong sense of belonging with this person/group.
Social support condition.  Participants assigned to this con-
dition were instructed to “close your eyes and think of two 
people that have recently given you help or support. Now, 
write the names of these people and the type of relationship

Lambert et al.	
1423
you have with them.” They then wrote a description of each 
individual, the support they received, and how it made them 
feel. Finally, they wrote a paragraph about a specific instance 
when they received support from this person.
Social value condition.  We sought to induce feelings of 
high social value by having the participants recall some com-
pliments that they had recently received. Instructions were as 
follows: “Close your eyes and think of two people that have 
recently given you a compliment and how it made you feel. 
Now, write the names of and the type of relationship you 
have with these individuals.” Once they had written down 
the names, they were asked to describe the compliment and 
how it made them feel. They were then instructed to write a 
paragraph describing another instance when they were given 
a compliment and how it made them feel.
Following the experimental manipulation, state meaning-
fulness was assessed using a 2-item measure consisting of 
the items “How much meaning do you feel in your life at this 
very moment?” and “At this moment, how much do you 
think you have a good sense of what makes life meaning-
ful?” Responses ranged from 1 to 15, with larger numbers 
indicating greater meaning. The items were highly correlated 
at .68. We switched to using this more sensitive, state mea-
sure so that we could pick up on more fleeting feelings of 
meaning.
Results
Results supported the hypothesis that priming thoughts of 
belongingness would cause an increase in perceptions of 
meaningfulness. There was a main effect for condition, F(2, 
102) = 3.05, p = .05. Planned comparisons revealed higher 
meaning among those in the belonging condition (M = 24.18, 
SD = 4.77) than among those in the social support condition 
(M = 21.39, SD = 5.62), F(1, 102) = 5.38, p < .05; d = .56, or 
the social value condition (M = 21.44, SD = 5.49), F(1, 102) 
= 4.59, p < .05; d = .55. Thus, sense of belonging caused an 
increase in meaning, even relative to other aspects of posi-
tive social interactions.
One shortcoming of the current study is that it did not 
provide evidence that sense of belonging was higher in the 
sense-of-belonging condition. We conducted a validation 
study to ensure that our sense-of-belonging manipulation 
increases sense of belonging.
Validation study.  Participants were 191 undergraduates from 
the United States who completed the experiment online. We 
measured the effect of experimental condition (sense of 
belonging, social support, and social value) on sense of 
belonging using a two-item questionnaire, for example, “I 
currently have a sense of belonging on my mind,” α = .74. 
Agreement was rated from 1 (strongly disagree) to 15 
(strongly agree). As expected, participants’ sense of belong-
ing varied according to condition, F(2, 188) = 2.98, p = .05. 
Those in the belonging condition expressed a stronger sense 
of belonging (M = 11.80, SD = 2.55) than those in social sup-
port condition (M = 10.68, SD = 3.22); F(1, 127) = 4.85, p = 
.03, or those in the social value condition (M = 10.69, SD = 
3.25); F(1, 127) = 4.67, p = .03. These results indicate that 
the manipulation used in the current study was effective at 
increasing a sense of belonging. We also measured positive 
and negative affect (Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988). How-
ever, neither positive affect (F < .1) nor negative affect (F < 
.1) varied by condition. Although we conducted this valida-
tion study, more data were needed to determine whether 
manipulating belongingness would simultaneously increase 
experienced belongingness and meaning.
Study 4
The objective of Study 4 was to provide additional experi-
mental evidence that manipulating belongingness would 
indeed increase subjective perceptions of belongingness 
and meaningfulness. This time we measured belonging 
directly following the manipulation and examined the indi-
rect effect of condition on meaning through belonging. We 
also sought to examine the robustness of our effects by 
examining the effects of belongingness using an Indian 
sample. We hypothesized that manipulated belonging 
would enhance meaning and that state belongingness would 
mediate the relationship between experimental condition 
and perceived meaningfulness.
Method
Participants.  Participants were 166 Indian undergraduate 
psychology students (65 female) participating in the study in 
exchange for partial course credit.
Procedure.  Materials were completed with paper and pencil 
measures. Participants were randomly assigned to one of the 
following three conditions. All conditions and procedures 
were identical to those in Study 3.
Measures
Belongingness.  Immediately following the experimental 
manipulation, participants answered two questions regard-
ing their sense of belonging: “Right now I have a sense of 
belonging on my mind” and “I really feel like I belong with 
others.” The items correlated at .56.
State meaningfulness.  State meaningfulness was again 
assessed using a 2-item measure that included the items 
“How much meaning do you feel in your life at this very 
moment?” and “At this moment, how much do you think 
you have a good sense of what makes life meaningful?” 
Responses ranged from 1 to 15, with larger numbers indi-
cating greater meaning. The items were highly correlated 
at .72.

1424	
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 39(11)
Results and Discussion 
One-way ANOVA confirmed that belongingness ratings var-
ied among experimental conditions F(2, 163) = 4.05, p < .05. 
Contrasts between conditions showed that priming thoughts 
of belongingness caused an increase in perceptions of 
belongingness (M = 5.65, SD = 1.87) relative to the social 
value condition (M = 4.89, SD = 1.98), F(1, 163) = 6.72, p = 
.01, d = .39. Unexpectedly, priming thoughts of social sup-
port also caused an increase in perceptions of belongingness 
(M = 5.68, SD = 1.47) relative to the social value condition 
(M = 4.89, SD = 1.98), F(1, 163) = 5.49, p < .05, d = .45. 
There were no significant differences on perception of 
belongingness between the thoughts of belongingness and 
thoughts of social support F(1, 163) = .08, p = .78, d = .02.
Given that among this Indian sample, social support 
increased belongingness at the same rate that the belonging-
ness condition increased belongingness, we did not include 
this condition in the remaining analyses. Compared with a 
social value condition (M = 23.33, SD = 5.78), the partici-
pants in the belonging condition reported significantly higher 
levels of perceived meaning (M = 25.69, SD = 4.35), F(1, 
108) = 5.87, p < .05, ηp
2 = .05.
To ensure that the increase of meaning was caused by the 
increased belonging, we ran mediational analyses and pre-
dicted that enhanced sense of belonging would mediate the 
relationship between experimental condition and perceived 
meaning. Again, given that the social support condition did 
not differ from the belonging condition, we ran the media-
tional analyses with the belonging condition and compli-
ment conditions only. We used the bootstrapping method 
developed by Preacher and Hayes (2008). Mediation has 
typically been tested using the Sobel (1982) test, which 
assumes that the product of coefficients constituting the 
indirect effect is normally distributed. However, this distri-
bution tends to be skewed and leptokurtic (Preacher & 
Hayes, 2008). As a result, resampling or bootstrapping 
methods are replacing prior methods for testing mediation 
(Shrout & Bolger, 2002). A confidence interval for the size 
of the indirect path is generated and if the values between 
the upper and lower confidence limit do not include zero, 
this indicates a statistically significant mediation effect. The 
indirect path through belongingness was statistically signifi-
cant, as indicated by finding that the 95% confidence inter-
val (bias corrected) for the indirect path through this 
mediator did not include zero [−2.14, −0.10], indicating 
sense of belonging significantly mediated the proposed rela-
tionship. Thus, our hypotheses were confirmed that enhanc-
ing a sense of belonging would increase perceived meaning 
in life relative to a positive control.
General Discussion
Four studies showed that a relatively strong sense of belong-
ing predicted and even caused people to perceive high levels 
of meaning in their lives. Study 1 was correlational, and 
results indicated a robust relationship between sense of 
belonging and self-reported meaning in life (β = .58). Study 
2 showed that initial perceived belongingness predicted self-
reported meaning 3 weeks later, indicating that the relation-
ship between sense of belonging and meaningfulness is not 
due to fleeting positive or negative feelings. Rather, the 
effect of sense of belonging on meaningfulness was shown to 
endure for at least 3 weeks.
A second objective of Study 2 was to provide evidence of 
meaningfulness beyond simple self-ratings. Participants’ ini-
tial sense of belonging predicted how they articulated the 
meaning of their lives in an essay format (again, 3 weeks 
later), as participants reporting a stronger initial sense of 
belonging wrote essays that independent raters judged as 
more indicative of having found meaning in life. Thus, 
belongingness does not simply encourage people to mark 
higher numbers on scales that ask them whether their lives 
have meaning. People who feel they belong are able to 
express in their own words their sense of life’s meaning—
and they do so better and more effectively than people with 
less sense of belonging, as judged by independent observers 
who were unaware of the belongingness scores. In addition, 
we think the use of impartial evaluators as a means of mea-
suring meaning in life is a small but important methodologi-
cal advance. This is supported by the fact that sense of 
belonging predicted articulated meaning scores in a way that 
was significantly correlated with self-reported meaning but 
at a sufficiently low level that there was a substantial amount 
of nonshared variance.
Studies 3 and 4 used experimental designs to determine 
whether activating a sense of belonging caused increased 
meaning in life. Rather than compare participants primed 
with a sense of belonging to a neutral control condition, we 
compared them with participants who were primed with 
other variables related to social relationships (social support 
and social value). This allowed the inference that the higher 
meaningfulness scores reported by those in the belonging-
ness condition were specifically due to the high sense of 
belongingness or that, given the mediational results, social 
value or social support affect meaningfulness through a sense 
of belonging. Study 3 demonstrated that a sense of belonging 
caused people to report higher levels of meaningfulness, 
over and above the meaning that stems from positive social 
relationships and interactions generally. However, we did not 
include any self-reports of belonging, so it was unclear 
whether it was belonging that was driving the effect on 
meaning.
Study 4 addressed this issue by measuring belongingness 
directly after the manipulation. The belonging condition and 
social support condition bolstered belongingness. However, 
as predicted, belongingness mediated the relationship 
between condition and increased meaningfulness. This final 
study provides further evidence for a robust relationship 
between belonging and perceived meaning. Thinking of

Lambert et al.	
1425
valued relationships causes people to feel that they belong, 
and this feeling contributes to causing people to find their 
lives to be highly meaningful.
Most of the participants in the current work were students 
at Western universities. However, participants in Study 4 
were Indian students. The results of Study 4 revealed that the 
effect of belonging on meaning is not specific to Westerners, 
as increased belonging was associated with a more meaning 
in both samples. This is not to suggest that the American and 
Indian samples responded identically to our manipulations. 
In particular, Indian participants demonstrated increased 
belonging in response to the belonging prompt and the social 
support prompt. This unique pattern of results likely reflects 
important 
cross-cultural 
differences 
between 
North 
Americans and Indians (e.g., Kapoor, Hughes, Baldwin, & 
Blue, 2003). For instance, it is possible individuals in col-
lectivist cultures are more likely to receive social support 
from perceived in-group members compared with individu-
als from individualistic cultures. As such, thinking about 
social support might activate thoughts of in-group cohesive-
ness more for participants in collectivist cultures compared 
with participants in individualistic cultures.
In a related vein, research suggests that individuals from 
collectivist cultures are more likely to use implicit social 
support strategies characterized by “the emotional comfort 
that one can obtain from social networks without disclosing 
or discussing one’s problems” (Kim, Sherman, & Taylor, 
2008; p. 522). This type of social support allows the indi-
vidual to be reminded of close others without having to 
worry about possibly relational implications associated with 
receiving explicit support (e.g., “losing face”). It is, there-
fore, possibly that the social support prompts in our studies 
similarly activated a heightened sense of belonging for the 
Indian participants compared with the North American par-
ticipants. Clearly, future research is needed to illuminate how 
cultural differences moderate the extent to which social sup-
port bears on perceptions of belonging and meaning in life.
Several lines of research illustrate that social exclusion 
decreases meaningfulness in some way (e.g., Stillman et al., 
2009; Williams, 1997, 2002; Williams et al., 2000), and 
emerging research has demonstrated that family relation-
ships promote meaning in life (Lambert et al., 2010). The 
present work sheds light on these findings by revealing that 
relationships that provide a sense of belonging are especially 
likely to promote meaning in life. In other words, past 
research has shown that having relationships is related to 
perceiving life as meaningful, whereas the present work 
found evidence for the kind of relationship that most pro-
motes meaning in life: those that promote a sense of belong-
ing. Future research should examine which type of 
associations (e.g., romantic partners vs. social groups) pro-
vide the greatest sense of belonging. While all types of social 
relationships likely contribute to the experience of meaning-
fulness, it is likely feelings of belongingness in large social 
groups play a particularly strong role in this experience. 
Group identification has long been implicated in the mainte-
nance and enhancement of psychological health and well-
being, and researchers have posited that it can enhance 
perceptions of meaningfulness specifically (e.g., Haslam et 
al., 2009). As such, future research may want to directly test 
how (and why) feelings of belongingness in large social 
groups enhance meaningfulness. An interesting test, for 
example, would be to examine how perceptions of prejudice 
and discrimination influence reports of meaning. While 
social exclusion may decrease feelings of meaningfulness 
(Williams, 1997), perceiving that one is ostracized because 
of ones’ group membership may paradoxically bolster the 
experience of meaning by making one’s group identity 
salient (cf. Branscombe, Schmitt, & Harvey, 1999).
Having a sense of belonging is to have a relationship with 
people, or a group of people, that brings about a secure feel-
ing of fitting in. As such, sense of belonging is not the same 
as simply having social relationships. Nor is it synonymous 
with having positive, close relationships. Our use of the term 
belonging is similar to that suggested by Brewer (2008), who 
proposed that belonging is appropriate for describing group 
membership, whereas bonding is preferable when discussing 
close attachments. The current work suggests that belonging, 
in the sense of fitting in with others, is closely related to find-
ing meaning in life.
Increasing the meaning that one finds in life may be an 
important way of promoting well-being (Steger & Kashdan, 
2009). The current findings may be useful to practitioners of 
group therapy, as efforts to increase a sense of belonging to 
the therapy group seem plausible. Yalom (1995) proposed 
that group cohesiveness (a distinct but related concept to 
sense of belonging) is the precursor to group self-esteem, 
hope, and psychological well-being in the therapeutic envi-
ronment, and recent work supports this claim (Marmarosh, 
Holtz, & Schottenbauer, 2005). Therefore, promoting a 
sense of belonging could have curative effects. Finally, 
given Yalom’s finding connecting group cohesiveness to 
self-esteem, it could be that gaining an increased sense of 
belonging boosts self-esteem and that this is what enhances 
meaning. This mechanism should be examined by future 
research.
Conclusion
Although previous research has demonstrated that, in gen-
eral, social relationships promote the perception that life is 
meaningful, the present work found that relationships that 
promote a sense of belonging are especially likely to pro-
mote a belief that one’s life is meaningful. The current stud-
ies not only demonstrated a robust correlation between these 
two variables but also showed that priming belongingness 
increased meaningfulness, even compared with participants 
primed with social support and social value. Furthermore, 
we did not rely solely on self-reported meaningfulness: We 
found a similar pattern of results when examining whether

1426	
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 39(11)
earlier belongingness would predict later ability to articulate 
one’s “why life is meaningful.” Using a diverse set of meth-
ods, we found converging evidence that feeling a sense of 
belongingness is a powerful predictor and cause of finding 
life meaningful.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect 
to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) received no financial support for the research, author-
ship, and/or publication of this article.
References
Ainsworth, M. D. (1989). Attachments beyond infancy. American 
Psychologist, 44, 709-716.
Aron, A., Aron, E. N., & Norman, C. (2001). Self-expansion model 
of motivation and cognition in close relationships and beyond. 
In G. J. O. Fletcher & M. S. Clark (Eds.), Blackwell handbook 
of social psychology: Interpersonal processes (pp. 478-501). 
Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Axelrod, R., & Hamilton, W. D. (1981). The evolution of coopera-
tion. Science, 211, 1390-1396.
Barash, D. P. (1977). Sociobiology and behavior. New York, NY: 
Elsevier.
Battista, J., & Almond, R. (1973). The development of meaning in 
life. Psychiatry, 36, 409-427.
Baumeister, R. F. (1991). The meanings of life. New York, NY: 
Guilford.
Baumeister, R. F. (2005). The cultural animal: Human nature, 
meaning, and social life. New York, NY: Oxford University 
Press.
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: 
Desire for interpersonal attachments as a fundamental human 
motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 497-529.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment. New 
York, NY: Basic Books.
Branscombe, N. R., Schmitt, M. T., & Harvey, R. D. (1999). 
Perceiving 
pervasive 
discrimination 
among 
African-
Americans: Implications for group identification and well-
being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 
135-149.
Brewer, M. B. (2008). Social identity and close relationships. In J. 
P. Forgas & J. Fitness (Eds.), Social relationships: Cognitive, 
affective, and motivational processes (The Sydney sympo-
sium of social psychology, pp. 167-184). New York, NY: 
Psychology Press.
Buss, D. M. (1990). The evolution of anxiety and social exclusion. 
Journal of Social & Clinical Psychology, 9, 196-210.
Crumbaugh, J. C., & Maholick, L. T. (1964). Manual of instruc-
tions for the purpose-in-life test. Lafayette, IN: Psychometric 
Affiliates.
Debats, D. L., van der Lubbe, P. M., & Wezeman, F. R. A. (1993). 
On the psychometric properties of the Life Regard Index (LRI): 
A measure of meaningful life. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 14, 337-345.
Ebersole, P. (1998). Types and depth of written life meanings. In P. 
T. P. Wong & P. S. Fry (Eds.), The human quest for meaning: A 
handbook of psychological research and clinical applications 
(pp. 179-191). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Frankl, V. E. (1963). Man’s search for meaning: An introduction 
to logotherapy. New York, NY: Washington Square. (Original 
work published 1946)
Frankl, V. E. (1969). The will to meaning: Foundations and applica-
tions of logotherapy. New York, NY: New American Library.
Harlow, L. L., Newcomb, M. D., & Bentler, P. M. (1986). 
Depression, self-derogation, substance use, and suicide ide-
ation: Lack of purpose in life as a mediational factor. Journal 
of Clinical Psychology, 42, 5-21.
Haslam, S. A., Jetten, J., Postmes, T., & Haslam, C. (2009). Social 
identity, health and well-being: An emerging agenda for 
applied psychology. Applied Psychology: An International 
Review, 58, 1-23.
Hicks, J. A., & King, L. A. (2009). Meaning in life as a subjec-
tive judgment and a lived experience. Social & Personality 
Psychology Compass, 10, 638-653.
Hogg, M. A. (2005). Uncertainty, social identity and ideology. In 
S. R. Thye & E. J. Lawler (Eds.), Advances in group processes 
(Vol. 22, pp. 203-230). New York, NY: Elsevier.
Hogg, M. A. (2009). Managing self-uncertainty through group 
identification. Psychological Inquiry, 20, 221-224.
Johnson, M. (1987). The body in the mind. Chicago, IL: University 
of Chicago Press.
Joske, W. D. (1981). Philosophy and the meaning of life. In E. D. 
Klemke (Ed.), The meaning of life (pp. 248-261). New York, 
NY: Oxford University Press. (Original work published 1974)
Kapoor, S., Hughes, P. C., Baldwin, J. R., & Blue, J. (2003). The 
relationship of individualism-collectivism and self-constru-
als to communication styles in India and the United States. 
International Journal of Intercultural Relations, 27, 683-700.
Kim, H. S., Sherman, D. K., & Taylor, S. E. (2008). Culture and 
social support. American Psychologist, 63, 518-526.
Klinger, E. (1977). Meaning and void: Inner experience and 
the incentives in people’s lives. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press.
Klinger, E. (1998). The search for meaning in evolutionary perspec-
tive and its clinical implications. In P. Wong & P. Fry (Eds.), 
The human quest for meaning: A handbook of psychological 
research and clinical applications (pp. 27-50). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Krause, N. (2007). Longitudinal study of social support and mean-
ing in life. Psychology and Aging, 22, 456-469.
Kunzendorf, R. G., & McGuire, D. (1994). Depression: The reality 
of “no meaning” versus the delusion of “negative meaning” 
(No Meaning Scale and Negative Meaning Scale published 
in Kunzendorf, Moran, & Gray’s [1995-1996] appendices). 
Unpublished manuscript.
Kunzendorf, R. G., Moran, C., & Gray, R. (1995-1996). Personality 
traits and reality-testing abilities, controlling for vividness 
of imagery. Imagination, Cognition, and Personality, 15, 
113-131.
Lambert, N. M., Baumeister, R., Stillman, T. F., & Fincham, F. D. 
(in press). Family and meaning: Examining the four needs for 
meaning as mediators. The International Journal of Existential 
Psychology and Psychotherapy.

Lambert et al.	
1427
Lambert, N. M., Stillman, T. F., Baumeister, R. F., Fincham, F. D., 
Hicks, J. A., & Graham, S. (2010). Family as a salient source of 
meaning in young adulthood. Journal of Positive Psychology, 
5, 367-376.
Leary, M. (2000). The nature and function of self-esteem: 
Sociometer theory. Burlington, VT: Elsevier.
Lifton, R. J. (1979). The broken connection: On death and continu-
ity of life. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.
Little, B. R. (1998). Personal project pursuit: Dimensions and 
dynamics of personal meaning. In P. T. P. Wong & P. S. Fry 
(Eds.), The human quest for meaning: A handbook of psy-
chological research and clinical applications (pp. 193-212). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Marmarosh, C., Holtz, A., & Schottenbauer, M. (2005). Group 
cohesiveness, group-derived collective self-esteem, group-
derived hope, and the well-being of group therapy members. 
Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 9, 32-44.
Mascaro, N., & Rosen, D. H. (2005). Existential meaning’s role in 
the enhancement of hope and prevention of depressive symp-
toms. Journal of Personality, 73, 985-1014.
Mascaro, N., & Rosen, D. H. (2006). The role of existential meaning 
as a buffer against stress. Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 
46, 168-190.
Mikulincer, M., Florian, V., & Hirschberger, G. (2004). The ter-
ror of death and the quest for love: An existential perspective 
on close relationships. In J. Greenberg & T. A. Pyszczynski 
(Eds.), Handbook of experimental existential psychology (pp. 
287-304). New York, NY: Guilford.
Moreland, R. L. (1987). The formation of small groups. In C. 
Hendrick (Ed.), Group processes: Review of personality and 
social psychology (Vol. 8, pp. 80-110). Newbury Park, CA: 
SAGE.
Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2008). Asymptotic and resam-
pling strategies for assessing and comparing indirect effects 
in multiple mediator models. Behavior Research Methods, 40, 
879-891.
Reker, G. T., Peacock, E. J., & Wong, P. T. P. (1987). Meaning 
and purpose in life and well-being: A lifespan perspective. 
Journals of Gerontology, 42, 44-49.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Russell, D. (1996). The UCLA Loneliness Scale (Version 3): 
Reliability, validity, and factor structure. Journal of Personality 
Assessment, 66, 20-40.
Schlegel, R. J., Hicks, J. A., King, L. A., & Arndt, J. (2011). Feeling 
like you know who you are: Perceived true self-knowledge and 
meaning in life. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
37, 745-756.
Shrout, P. E., & Bolger, N. (2002). Mediation in experimental and 
nonexperimental studies: New procedures and recommenda-
tions. Psychological Methods, 7, 422-445.
Sobel, M. E. (1982). Asymptotic confidence intervals for indirect 
effects in structural models. In S. Leinhardt (Ed.), Sociological 
methodology (pp. 290-312). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Sommer, K. L., Williams, K. D., Ciarocco, N. J., & Baumeister, R. 
F. (2001). When silence speaks louder than words: Explorations 
into the intrapsychic and interpersonal consequences of social 
ostracism. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 23, 225-243.
Steger, M. F. (2012). Experiencing meaning in life: Optimal func-
tioning at the nexus of well-being, psychopathoology, and 
spirituality In P. T. P. Wong & P. S. Fry (Eds.), Handbook of 
personal meaning: Theory, research, and application (2nd ed., 
pp. 165-184). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Earlbaum.
Steger, M. F., & Frazier, P. (2005). Meaning in life: One link in the 
chain from religiousness to well-being. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology, 52, 574-582.
Steger, M. F., Frazier, P., Oishi, S., & Kaler, M. (2006). The 
Meaning in Life Questionnaire: Assessing the presence of and 
search for meaning in life. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 
53, 80-93.
Steger, M. F., & Kashdan, T. B. (2007). Stability and specificity of 
meaning in life and life satisfaction over one year. Journal of 
Happiness Studies, 8, 161-179.
Steger, M. F., & Kashdan, T. B. (2009). Depression and everyday 
social activity, intimacy, and well-being. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology, 56, 289-300.
Steger, M. F., Oishi, S., & Kashdan, T. B. (2009). Meaning in 
life across the life span: Levels and correlates of meaning in 
life from emerging adulthood to older adulthood. Journal of 
Positive Psychology, 4, 43-52.
Stillman, T. F., Baumeister, R. F., Lambert, N. M., Crescioni, A. 
W., DeWall, C. N., & Fincham, F. D. (2009). Alone and with-
out meaning: Life loses meaning following social exclusion. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45, 686-694.
Tajfel, H. (Ed.). (1978). Differentiation between social groups. 
London, England: Academic Press.
Twenge, J. M., Catanese, K. R., & Baumeister, R. F. (2003). Social 
exclusion and the deconstructed state: Time perception, mean-
inglessness, lethargy, lack of emotion, and self-awareness. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 409-423.
Van Beest, I., & Williams, K. D. (2006). When inclusion costs and 
ostracism pays, ostracism still hurts. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 91, 918-928.
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and 
validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect: The 
PANAS Scales. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
54, 1063-1070.
Williams, K. D. (1997). Social ostracism. In R. M. Kowalski (Ed.), 
Aversive interpersonal behaviors (pp. 133-170). New York, 
NY: Plenum.
Williams, K. D. (2002). Ostracism: The power of silence. New 
York, NY: Guilford.
Williams, K. D., Cheung, C. K. T., & Choi, W. (2000). 
CyberOstracism: Effects of being ignored over the internet. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 748-762.
Wong, P. T. P., & Fry, P. S. (Eds.). (1998). The human quest for 
meaning: A handbook of psychological research and clinical 
applications. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Yalom, I. D. (1995). The theory and practice of group psychother-
apy (4th ed.). New York, NY: Basic Books.
Zika, S., & Chamberlain, K. (1987). Relation of hassles and per-
sonality to subjective well-being. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 53, 155-162.
Zika, S., & Chamberlain, K. (1992). On the relation between mean-
ing in life and psychological well-being. British Journal of 
Psychology, 83, 133-145.