Th  e Ideal Home and Garden, December 2014    Vol 9 Issue 2` 100
THE IDEAL HOME AND GARDEN         DECEMBER 2014                         Vol 9 Issue 2CHRISTMAS 
GOODIES
Festive Accessories 
for the Home
THE BIG 
PARTY GUIDE  Colour Burst  
51 ideas to make your 
home winter-ready
Plus: 75 Creative Ways to Say it with Flowers
+101 ways to play the perfect 
hostess... shopping guide, decor inspiration, midnight bites and cupcake love! STRAIGHT TALK
19 From the Editor’s desk
 INBOX
20 What our readers have to say
 TREND-IN!
22 What’s red hot in the market
The Ideal Home and Garden, December 2014    Vol 9 Issue 2` 100
THE IDEAL HOME AND GARDEN         DECEMBER 2014                        CHRISTMAS 
GOODIES 
Festive Accessories  
for the Home
THE BIG  
PARTY GUIDE Colour Burst 51 ideas to make your 
home winter-ready
Plus: 75 Creative Ways to Say it with FlowersSUBSCRIBER’S COPY
+101 ways to play the perfect 
hostess... shopping guide, decor inspiration, midnight bites and cupcake love!
Cover Image
Photography:
Prachi Damle
Location:
Marvel Kyra, Marvel Realtors, Margarpatta, Pune
34
40 Shopping Spree
34 Must-Have
36 Tap the Trend
37 Haute on the Web
38 Christmas Cheer
43 The Big Party Guide
50 Sweet Treat 
52 Fruity DelightContents
December 2014 Vol 9 Issue 2
22#SJOHFSHPOPNJDTBOEVTFSDPNGPSUUPZPVSXBMMDBCJOFUTGPSJOTUBODFXJUI
"7&/504)'5IFCJGPMEMJGUTZTUFNNPWFTBXBZFOUJSFMZGSPNZPVSXPSLTQBDF
TUPQTJOBOZQPTJUJPOBOEDMPTFTHFOUMZBOERVJFUMZMFBWJOHZPVQMFOUZPGIFBE
DMFBSBODFBOETQBDFUPBDDFTTUIFDBCJOFUJOUFSJPSXJUIFBTFBOEDPNGPSU"7&/504)'ݠ
8IFONPUJPOVOGPMETGSFFMZ
XXXCMVNDPNBWFOUPT$VTUPNFS$BSF
	UPMMGSFF

DVTUPNFSDBSF!IBGFMFJOEJBDPN BLOGGER-SPEAK
56   Winter Soirée
 HAUTE THIS MONTH
60 Wall Art
68 Colour Code
 REAL LUXURY 
76 Limited Edition
 The IT Store
78 Design meets Tradition
 ARTIST SPEAK 
84 Celebrating Life 62
56Contents
December 2014 Vol 9 Issue 2
78
 IDEAL LIVING 
86 Open House
 IDEAL GETAWAYS
92 Rustic Charm
 NOUVEAU ARRIVAL
100 Plush Factor
Subscription form on Page No.  35 11198
104 FOOD FETISH
109 Brunch Time
 GREEN HOUSE
114 Lounge in Style
118 Flower Art
 EVENT
128 The Grand Show
132 Destination Paris
133 Night of Glory
 Soul Space
134 Haven of Luxury
140 ST   RE MAPContents
December 2014 Vol 9 Issue 2Editor Riddhima Seal
Sr. Feature Writers Benoy Sebastian (Mumbai),  
Ruhi Singh (New Delhi)
Features Writer Adrian Remedios
Head Design & Production  Ravi Parmar
Graphic Designers Mahesh Jadhav,  
Prachali Bhiwandkar
Image Desk Deepak Narkar
Production Supervisor Dinesh Bhajnik
Publisher Stephen Cyril D’Lima
Administration Sameer Phatak
Circulation  
Kapil Kaushik, (Delhi)  
D. Kosamkar, (Mumbai)
Subscriptions  
Sachin Kelkar Tel: + 91 22 43525220  Fax: +91 22 24955394  
Email: subscriptions@nextgenpublishing.net
For Digital Subscriptions
Apple Newsstand & Magzter Queries:
help@magzter.com
Zinio Queries:  http:/ /in.zinio.com/help/index.jsp
EDITORIAL / MARKETING HEAD OFFICE
Trade World, C-Wing, 2nd Floor, Kamala Mills Compound, 
Senapati Bapat Marg, Lower Parel(W), Mumbai 400013 
Tel: + 91 22 43525252. Fax: +91 22 24955394  
Email: tihg@nextgenpublishing.net
MARKETING OFFICES
Ahmedabad
Next Gen Publishing Ltd., c/o Working Company
Opp. Sardar Patel Seva samaj plot, Above Zen Cafe
Mithakali Six Roads, Ellisbridge, Ahmedabad - 380006
Bangalore 
Unit No. 509, 5th Floor ‘B’ Wing, 
Mittal Towers, MG Road, Bangalore -560001, India
Tel: +91 8066110116/17 Fax: +91 80 41472574 
Chennai
Unit No:20, Third ﬂoor, Modern Towers, 
35/23 West Cott Road, Royapettah, Chennai 600 014  
Tel +91-44-39149889/90/91  Fax +91-44-39149892
New Delhi
26B, Side Entrance, Ground Floor, Okhla Industrial Estate,  
Phase-III, New Delhi - 110020.  
Tel: +91 11 42346600  Fax: +91 11 42346678
Pune
401B, Gandhi Empire, 2, Sareen Estate, Kondhwa Road, Pune 411040 
Tel: + 91 20 32930291  Fax: + 91 20 26830465
Hyderabad
Srinivas Gangula. Territory Sales Incharge (Circulation) Mob: 09000555756
Kolkata
Vidyasagar Gupta. Territory Sales Incharge (Circulation). Mob: 09804085683 
Printed by  Stephen Cyril D’Lima Next Gen Publishing Ltd., Trade World, C-Wing, 2nd Floor, Kamala Mills 
Compound, Senapati Bapat Marg, Lower Parel(W), Mumbai 400013 .  
Published by  Stephen Cyril D’Li ma on behalf of Next Gen Publishing Ltd., Trade World, C-Wing, 2nd Floor,  
Kamala Mills Compound, Senapati Bapat Marg, Lower Parel(W), Mumbai 400013 .  
Printed at Kalajyothi Process Pvt. Ltd, 1-1-60/5 RTCX Roads, Hyderabad - 20.  
Published at Next Gen Publishing Ltd., Trade World, C-Wing, 2nd Floor, Kamala Mills Compound,  
Senapati Bapat Marg, Lower Parel(W), Mumbai 400013 .
Editor  Riddhima Seal
’Like’ 
www.facebook.com/
Idealhomeandgarden
Now read your favourite magazine wherever you go...Available on PC... Mac... Tablet... or any other handheld device!To subscribe online
http:/ /nextgenpublishing.in/subs
Join  
us on 
twitter 
@idealhomeIndia
www.zinio.com/idealhomeandgarden http://pocketmags.com/nextgen
Digital Platform Partners
The Ideal Home and Garden, December 2014    Vol 9 Issue 2` 100
CHRISTMAS 
GOODIES 
Festive Accessories  
for the Home
THE BIG  
PARTY GUIDE  Colour Burst  
51 ideas to make your 
home winter-ready
Plus: 75 Creative Ways to Say it with FlowersSUBSCRIBER’S COPY
+101 ways to play the perfect 
hostess... shopping guide, decor inspiration, midnight bites and cupcake love!The Ideal Home and Garden December 201 4  |  19 The winter sun is shining nice and bright, my balcony is full of blooms and  
I am beginning to enjoy the steaming hot cups of coffee. And as much as  I love lazing around my home this time of the year, I find my social diary  choc-a-bloc with invites – some brunches, others barbecue evenings, and a bunch of  cocktail evenings. 
Entertaining during this time of the year is at its peak. And we recognise the need for you to play the perfect hostess each time. That’s why we have put together an extensive Party Guide guaranteed to take care of all your hosting needs – from what to shop for and where, what to serve and how to set up your place in style – it’s all here.
And whether you are planning to entertain indoors, or planning to take the party outdoors, say it with flowers. Take 
inspiration from our story Flower Art to know how you can make the most of this season of blooms.
With the new season setting in, it’s almost mandatory to get your home winter ready. And what is better than a splash 
of colour to perk up an otherwise grey season? No, don’t stop at just the paint can, though we have that bit sorted for you too in our Colour Code story. Wallpapers are the hottest (and the easiest) way to jazz up an otherwise mundane space. Take cue from our story Wall Art to zero down on the one that appeals to you the most.
And if you are looking to escape the hustle bustle of city life during your Christmas break, the rustic Laxman Sagar 
Resort in Rajasthan is for you. I have my heart set on this one. And for all you know, I might just be waiting for my Santa Claus to arrive somewhere in faraway Rajasthan this time.
Wishing you the best of festive times ahead.Merry Christmas!
Riddhima Seal
Editor
r.seal@nextgenpublishing.net
Photograph by Mahesh Reddy
 TALKg
Á Good Earth continues to be my eternal 
favourite. This time it’s the bar accessories.
Á The Elementto range of wallpapers are a unique blend  of charm and sophistication.MY PICKS: 20  |  Decemebr 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenA FRESH START
Vibration, colorful, and alive, 
that's what the TIHG  8th 
Anniversary Issue meant to me. It made all the more sense as I have very recently shifted into my own place and was just wondering about doing it up when I came across your issue. I just loved Bhavna Bhatnagar's blog "An Indian Summer", since I love using warm colours in my home. I am going to start incorporating many of these shades into my new home. Also, Trend-in and Haute on the web in this month's edition were helpful. I am eagerly waiting for the Spring/Summer issue of TIHG. Cheers to your team! 
Neha, Bangalore  INBOX
THE 8TH COLOUR 
My heartiest congratulations on 
completing eight stupendous years in quality journalism. TIHG is one periodical which always serves factory fresh, farm fresh reading material.  I called you the 8th Color of rainbow as I had never come across a better depiction & compilation of VIBGYOR like you did. And the 8th color to me is "Scintillating TIHG" which is capable of imbibing every color In It. Besides, you turned the Anniversary Issue into a Collector’s Edition through your coverage on the Masters of the Trade – Designer Tales. 
Padma Jagdish, New Delhi
at tihg@nextgenpublishing.net! The 
best letter of the month wins a hamper worth `3,000 from Baaya Design - 
the folk art and home décor store at Raghuvanshi mills in Lower Parel, Mumbai. The November hamper includes this Glass Tray - with folk art. So get writing now! 
Letter of the Month
a Bhatn agar'sbl
S
Write 
to us..NEWER AVENUES 
The Anniversary issue had some great 
features, the compilation broke all the previous records in terms of beauty, content and presentation. The par-excellence features included A Blissful Bath, Meal Junction, Peace of Mind, and The Furnished Room. However, I would rate Designer Tales as the Feature of the Month as it made an unprecedented read. The feature impressed me most.  We all relish many delicacies without knowing the hands who make it happen, and once you see them the taste gets doubled. These 8 Remarkable Designers opened the door of the Kitchen to allow us to have that feeling. Great read it was. B AJIT, New Delhi
You've won 
this flower vase.
 Wo Hoo !
VALUE ADDITION 
Y our 8th Anniversary Special Issue 
contained an "Eye opener tool" as well amidst ‘Cooking Tools’ , as till now I was under a self-satisfying presumption that my newly-modified kitchen is complete in all respects. However, you politely broke this misconception of mine and made my kitchen richer by educating with these new and useful Tools. Although they are inexpensive, they would help me to the priceless extent. Furthermore, A Blissful Bath and Shower Power will also be doing a great value addition to my washroom. I am going to have many things to flaunt in my next kitty party. 
Anju Khetarpal, Ghaziabad
FOR DETAILS, REFER TO STORE MAP 22  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
TTREND  - IN!
Fine Dine  
Godrej Interio has introduced a new and vibrant table range, 
 Mango Dew. The dining table in the range has 
a unique shape and the colour is guaranteed to stimulate your appetite and encourage healthy conversation while dining. The design of the table legs adds to the stability of the table and the powder coating helps prevent rusting.  
Truly Majestic   
India’s leading premium furniture and modular kitchens retailer Grandeur, introduces a fresh collection of Italian beds, ‘Letti 2014’ by Pianca. Maintaining its signature minimalistic design DSSURDFKWKLVODWHVWFROOHFWLRQUHGHÀQHVFRQWHPSRUDU\HOHJDQFH 
The beds in this collection are a subtle blend of aesthetics and comfort, and are manufactured using only the highest quality of raw materials, at Pianca’s state-of-the-art facility in Italy. 
  
Festive Cheer
Red is undoubtedly the colour of celebration, happiness and love. Ring in the festivities with Maspar’s solid and plaid cushions ZRYHQZLWKÀQHFRXQWSXUHFRWWRQWKUHDGVwith an additional brushing treatment that gives it the soft and tender feel. The cushions come in vibrant yet subtle checks and solid colours to refresh your senses.
T
FOR DETAILS, REFER TO STORE MAPTREND  - IN!
24  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenHigh on 
Technology     
Somany Ceramics Limited was 
presented with The American Ceramic Society’s (AcerS) Corporate Technical Achievement Award 2014 for the development of Veil Craft (VC) Shield Floor Tiles. The award highlights WKHVLJQLÀFDQWPHULWWKDW6RPDQ\has offered to the society through commercialisation of its technology. 
Luxury 
Bathing   
The Hyderabad-based 
promoter of international luxury sanitaryware, Valueline has launched the street, ‘Via Monte Napolene’ in its showroom. Situated on the WKLUGÁRRURIWKHVKRZURRPthe street is spread across an area of 7,500 sq ft displaying 12 brands showcasing the latest in kitchen faucets and decadent baths. Each gallery at ‘Via Monte Napoleone’ is treated as an individual boutique lending a different DPELHQFHWRWKHÁRRU
Floored!   
Known for manufacturing 
inter national quality laminates and 
adhesives, Stylam has introduced 
VXSHULRUTXDOLW\H[WHULRUÁRRUERDU
GV
under the name Walkon. These 
ÁRRUERDUGVDUHSURFHVVHGLQODPLQDWH
presses under high pressure and at 
high temperatures. As a result, the 
boards are effective, weather-
proof and long-lasting.T
FOR DETAILS, REFER TO STORE MAPTREND  - IN!
26  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenCreating Waves  
RAK Ceramics, the world’s largest tiles manufacturing company has 
embarked upon an ambitious road show concept called “RAK Aap Ke Shaher”, which will cover 50 cities pan India over the next one year. 
Power 
Cleaning   
Kärcher, the world’s leading cleaning 
specialist is bringing to India its latest 
range of multi-purpose Vacuums (MP 
Vac). The solution to all tough cleaning 
jobs in and around the house. The new 
vacuum range is the strongest ever, 
thanks to its intense suction power. The 
MP Vac can be used to clean up more 
than just dust and extract both wet 
and dry debris, making 
them ideal for cleaning 
the home, garage, 
car and workshop.
Safe Living     
Panasonic offers a range of Wireless Video Intercom models, the  VL-SW250BX and VL-SV30BX that come with advanced features and ease of operation that helps in enhancing home security. Panasonic Video door phones give the liberty to speak and see the visitor without actually letting them in the house. The new models by the company allow users to check visitors on the monitor without opening the door and respond promptly from anywhere at home or if the user is doing something else, by a wireless handset.
TTREND  - IN!
28  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden FOR DETAILS, REFER TO STORE MAPRelax in Style 
The new Villeroy & Boch outdoor whirlpool Just 
Silence features a minimalist European design that focuses on cubist shapes and a bi-coloured concept. The tubs have a multitude of individual massage functions for a relaxation experience that caters to \RXURZQSHUVRQDOQHHGV-XVW6LOHQFHLVDÁH[LEOHwellness solution with a clear design statement.
Raise 
The Bar
Cheeky and stylish, the 
wall shelved bar from IDUS 
ÁDXQWVWKHVKDSHRIDOLTXLG
drop. It features a middle shelf in stainless steel for 
glasses and bottles, and 
an integrated wine rack 
accommodating upto 
15 standard sized 
wine bottles.
Mesmerising Shades  
Elementto introduces it latest collection for 2015 - a paradise of charm and sophistication. The collection comprises classy wallpaper designs, and includes smaller complementary patterns to coordinate with the large scale designs, creating a contemporary FROOHFWLRQ5DQJLQJIURPÁRUDOWRJHRPHWULFSULQWVZLWKthe look of silk and other natural materials, there is a style that suits every interior, be it modern or traditional.Perfect Steps  
Pergo, the world’s most SUHIHUUHGODPLQDWHÁRRULQJbrand recently unveiled its ODWHVWYLQ\OÁRRULQJFROOHFWLRQThe brand has always aimed at providing the EHVWÁRRULQJVROXWLRQWRLWVcustomers for both living and commercial areas. The latest YLQ\OÁRRULQJLVWKHSHUIHFWcombination of beautiful design and performance to revamp a place. 
T
FOR DETAILS, REFER TO STORE MAPTREND  - IN!
30  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
Recreational 
Cooking  
Hafele recently unveiled the 
NAGOLD series, an exclusive range of home appliances for the Indian kitchen. The newly-launched NAGOLD series of home appliances comprises built in hobs; built-in microwave and electric ovens; high-performance cooker hoods; built-in barbeque and deep fryer; built in dishwashers and built-in refrigerators. Jürgen Wolf, MD, Hafele says, “If there is any one thing Indians love more than their food, it is the cooking. The cooking methods are different and their cleaning needs are different. Grinding, kneading, pounding, scrubbing — food is approached with vigour and passion. Hafele India understands that and has innovated solutions for the Indian home with the trademarked ‘Häfele’ excellence in quality and functionality”.
Häfele India recently announced its partnership with Caesarstone, a pioneer in the development of quartz surfaces and the world’s premium quartz manufacturer. Caesarstone quartz surfaces are made of 93 per cent natural quartz; making Caesarstone strong, non-porous, low maintenance 
as well as impact-, stain-, heat- and scratch-resistant. Balakrishnan Pillai, Manager, Caesarstone, Häfele India, adds, “Our vision is to not only introduce Indian customers to the high quality brand but also give them a truly international brand experience. Caesarstone quartz surfaces fall under the super premium category owing to its exclusivity and numerous EHQHÀWVRYHURWKHUQDWXUDOand composite surfaces.”
Premium StoneCooking Bonanza
The New Zealand-based innovators, Fisher & 
Paykel launched an exclusive showroom at the Audio Voice store at Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi. The brand is renowned for its award winning technology, and offers a complete range of built-in kitchen appliances including ovens, hoods, hobs, dishwashers, coffee maker, refrigerators, washers and dryers. 
On the occasion of the International Chef’s Day, Best Foods in association with the Indian Culinary Forum (ICF) hosted the 11th Annual Chef Awards 2014 at The Ashok, New Delhi. The award ceremony was graced by the chief guest Dr Lalit K Panwar, Secretary, Ministry of Tourism and Amitabh Kant, Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion and heavyweights of the hospitality fraternity. The competition is aimed at bringing Indian chefs at par with their counter parts in the developed Western world and making them eligible to be a part of culinary competitions worldwide.
Smart Kitchens
T
FOR DETAILS, REFER TO STORE MAPTREND  - IN!
32  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
Cool Action Gel infused visco pillows 
from Serta provide right support and comfort to the head and the neck. The unique visco elastic gel conforms to the shape of the head and thus provides unparalleled comfort and support.Spanish Luxury brand, PIEL S.A. Launches spectacular luxury blankets for Indian consumer. The brand re-creates a sumptuous lifestyle, bringing a fresh approach to each new design with a mix of classic and contemporary ideas to form their various collections. 
Add a fresh unique look to your home with handcrafted statement chairs from Beyond Designs. Polished to attain that VSDUNOLQJÀQLVKWKHVHFKDLUVare available in hues of pearly white, grey, orange, and black.
With the expertise  
to provide complete carpeting 
VROXWLRQVIRU\RXUKRPHRIÀFH
hotel,conference, banquet hall, 
Qaaleen, owned by  
JV Group has opened a  
store in the capital recently.  
It also offers  the choice of  
designing your own unique  
carpet by selecting your  
own design.  Swarovski introduces ‘The Crystal Living Masterpieces 2014’ Collection in India.The collection comprise the Crystal Myriad collection ZLWKWKH¶PDJQLÀFHQW3KRHQL[·DQG¶7KH%ODFNStallion’, along with an exclusive and benevolent addition; ‘The Buddha’. Stylebook
38 Shopping Spree
43 The Big Party Guide
50 Cupcakes
56 Blogger-Speak
Sruthi Singh34  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenShopping Spree
Winter Wonders
Ring in the festivities 
this Christmas with furnishings in the classic red and white combine. The richness of red blends in beautifully with the sophistication of white to create a space that is warm and inviting.
Timeless Classic Collection, 
Maspar, Price on Request A home that speaks for itself, décor that has a unique language 
and a style that is incomparable... If that is what you want for your home, then The Ideal Home and Garden is just the magazine for you. From easy-to-do-at-home style tips to expert advice on décor, each month we present innumerable ways to add colour, elegance and glamour to your home.
The Ideal Home and Garden will also intimate you with the 
latest trends, the newest home décor stores, restaurants and resorts that display fabulous interiors, the best real estate buys and recipes that will leave you salivating for more!
Plus, each month, we will also bring you a real home with a 
fantastic sense of aesthetics with the owners sharing their style tips and décor preferences. From budget homes and bachelors pads to spacious bungalows and country homes, a whole new world of interiors will open up for you.Along with these, ﬁnd the best accessories and appliances, kitchen and bathroom décor trends and an abundance of garden news and styles which will help you make the most of the open space you have.
The Ideal Home and Garden is a 
way of life... And now it is yours!
WHY WOULD  
YOU SUBSCRIBE  TO THE IDEAL HOME AND GARDEN?  HERE ARE            REALL Y            GOOD REASON
S!1 SUBSCRIBE NOW!
rt 
ys 
open space you have.
The Ideal Home an d Gar den is a 
way o f life... And now 
it is yours !
SUBSCRIBE NOW!
YOUR DETAILS (ALL DETAILS IN CAPITAL LETTERS)
Name: Mr/Ms
OccupationDate of birthAddress
City    State
Pincode    EmailPhone (Off)    Phone (Res)
Mobile No.    36 Issues worth ` 3,600, only for ` 2,500 (save ` 1,100 ) 
    12 issues Worth ` 1,200, yours only for ` 999 (save ` 201) 
International rate - 1 year INR 7000/- or USD 125 by air mail post.The Investment Plan
%&$&.BER 2014Kindly draw the cheque/DD/PO in favor of NEXT GEN PUBLISHING LTD. (Please 
add Rs. 20/- extra for outstation cheque)
Please Find enclosed Cheque/DD no.  
Dated 
Bank  
Branch 
Or please charge my credit card
  Visa       MasterCard       
Card No.        
Card expiry date
Name 
(as appears on card)
Date 
Signature Please complete the order form and mail it to us at Next Gen Publishing Ltd.,  
2nd Floor, C Wing, Trade World, Kamala Mills Compound,  Senapati Bapat Marg, Lower Parel (W). Mumbai 400013You can also fax the order for credit card purchases to +91 22 2495 5394For clarifications, email: subscriptions@nextgenpublishing.net or call +91 22 4352 5252
TERMS AND CONDITIONS: Please allow 4-5 weeks for processing of your subscription. Copies will be sent by ordinary post only. Next Gen Publishing will not be responsible for postal delay, 
transit loses or mutilation of copies. No cancellation of subscriptions will be entertained after commencement of subscription. Please mention your name and address on the reverse of your DD/Cheque. All disputes are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of courts in Mumbai only. 
Powered by
Call +91 22 4352 5252Subscribe using Credit Card over the phone
subscriptions@nextgenpublishing.net
Monday - Friday 9 a.m to 5.30 p.m
NEWDELIVERED FREE 
TO YOUR DOOR
SA VE UP TO 31% 
ON COVER PRICE
NEVER MISS AN 
ISSUE AGAIN
AND MOST IMPORTANT  
OF ALL, A SERIOUSLY  GOOD MAGAZINE...
E 
 1
SONS!
 442
336  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenTap the Trend
Nothing perks up a 
setting better than 
ÁRUDODFFHQWV/LJKW
DIHZFDQGOHVDQG
ZLWQHVVWKHGHOLFDWHO\
SDLQWHGWDEOHZDUH
EXUVWLQWRIXOOEORRPIshatvam
IshatvamIshatvamFlower  Power
%ULJKWHQ\RXUWDEOHZLWKWKHVHÁRUDOEHDXWLHV
Impressions: Riddhima seal
InvHome
$OOSULFHVRQUHTXHVWThe Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  37 Haute on the Web
Smart Study
Fab Home 
Arezzo Study 
Table Honey, 
`11,999, 
fabfurnish.com
If writing late into the night is your thing, you 
will love this private study nook with storage.
Impressions: Ruhi Singh38  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
Bring home the season’s latest 
offerings — from the quirky to the 
sophisticated, we have it all sorted. 
Impressions: Adrian Remedios
Christmas
CHEER
GrandeurShopping Spree
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  39 
Shopping Spree
Christmas Accessories, 
price on request, The 
Great Eastern HomeSanta,price on request,SwarovskiCeiling Lamp, price on request, 
The Great Eastern Home
Book Box, `1,990, 
Address Home
Ceramic Bowl, 
`1,645, The Home 
of the Traveler
Overhead Lamp, price on request,  
Visionnaire
Festive Kitchen Set, 
price on request, 
My Tailor Home40  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenShopping Spree
Kavita Singh Interiors
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  41 
Tea Pot Clock, price on 
request, artanddecors.comShopping Spree
Dog with Santa hat, price on request, Swarovski
Christmas Ornaments, price on request, The Home of the TravelerHome Globe, `  3,940, 
Address Home
Decorative accessories, price on request, The Great Eastern HomeDinner Set, ` 1,595, Bonita
Poinsettia 
Ornament, 
price on 
request, 
SwarovskiOverhead 
Lamp, price 
on request, 
Anemos
The Ideal Home and Garden, December 2014    Vol 9 Issue 2` 100
DEN
       DECEMBER 2014                         
Vol 9 Issue 2CHRISTMAS GOODIES 
Festive Accessories  for the Home
THE BIG  
PARTY GUIDE Colour Burst 
51 ideas to make your 
home winter-ready
Plus: 75 Creative Ways to Say it with FlowersSUBSCRIBER’S COPY
+101 ways to play the perfect 
hostess... shopping guide, decor inspiration, midnight bites and cupcake love!
Digital Platform Partners
www.zinio.com/idealhomeandgarden
http://pocketmags.com/nextgenNow read your favourite magazine wherever you go...
Available on PC... Mac... Tablet... or any other handheld device!
Available on
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  43 Shopping Spree
GuideThe 
Throw a spirited soirée this season with our exhaustive 
shopping guide, decor ideas, midnight bites and more.  
Impressions: Ruhi Singh & Riddhima SealPartyBig44  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
Shopping Spree
5
32
1. Bird range cup and saucer set, 
`2,035, Arttd’inox
2. Blueberry cups and saucer, `1,265, 
Arttd’inox
3. Cup and saucer, price on request, 
Andyy Home
4. Cup and Saucer, `600, The Home of 
the Traveler
5. Tea set, price on request, Good Earth
6. Noir tea set, price on request, 
Address Home
7. Bird range pot, ` 4,675, Arttd’inox61
7
4
TEA TIMEThe Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  45 Shopping Spree
1. Taj Collection, price on request, 
Address Home
2. Blue and White Collection, price on 
request, Address Home
3. Alfresco Off White Collection, price on 
request, Address Home 
4.Dinner set, ` 6,700, Ektra by Srithai 
Superware73  1
42
FINE DINING46  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
Shopping Spree
32
1.Bar rules poster, ` 239, FabFurnish
2.Bar accessories, ` 1,880, Arttd’inox
3.Bar accessories, price on request, 
InV Home
4. Bar cabinet, ` 19,999, Fabfurnish
5. Wine Holder, price on request, 
Tranceforme
6.Bar trolley, ` 12,473, FabFurnish1
6
4
5
RAISE THE BARThe Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  47 Shopping Spree
1.Serveware, ` 5,965, `5,250 and 
`6,250 respectively, 
The Home of the Traveler
2. Safari Napkin Ring, `2,100 
(set of two), Address Home 
3.Platter and bowls, `2,000, 
HouseProud
4.Fleur de lis Napkin Rings, price on 
request, Andyy Home
5.Jungle Platter, ` 3,490, Address 
Home 
6. Estel Platter, price of request, 
Episode 42
5 63
1
SERVE IN STYLE
48  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
Shopping Spree
2
52
1.Cakes and cookies stand, price on 
request, Good Earth
2.Pastry stand and snack plates, `3,295 
and ` 2,295 respectively, Elvy
3.Blueberry cookie server, ` 1,265, 
Arttd’inox
4.Monet Cake Stand, price on request, 
Arttd’inox
5.Redoute Meadow tea set, price on 
request, Andyy Home
6. Cake Platter, ` 38,500, Frazer & Haws 34
6
SWEET TOOTH
1The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  49 Shopping Spree
1.Red Amaryllis Glam, price on request, 
Inv Homes
2.Candle stand, `24,750 
IRUJROGOHDÀQJ7KH%LJ'RRU
3.Brass table lamp, `11,250, The Big Door
4.Crystal Vase, price on request, 
The Big Door
5. Lanter Qaiersmall Amber Gla, `790, 
Address Home 
6. Embossed Gold Candle, `390, 
Address Home 
%XWWHUÁ\9RWLYH*ROG` 490, Address Home 
8. Classic Three Arms Candlebra, 
`1,490, Address Home 
9.Decorative platter and tea lite holder, ` 1,695 
and ` 795 respectively, Elvy9
8947
1 2 3
567
LIGHT UPFeature
50  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
Sweet
thebakers.in
Cupcakes are a great way to 
add that dollop of colour to your 
dessert platter. 
Impressions: Ruhi Singh
TREATFeature
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  51 
Bright, colourful and 
deliciously edible, 
cupcakes are enjoying 
their time in the 
limelight. Bring them 
home this Christmas in 
a variety of shapes and 
sizes for that additional 
element of sparkle - 
and - fun.
1.Memories...with you always
2.Bakerwee3.Caramella by Ridhima Arora4.The Metropolitan Hotel and Spa5.Tuptakes6.Frosty Trosty7.thebakers.in8.Tuptakes9.SUgar.Dust10.thebakers.in1 2 3
5
8
9 10
74
652  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenGifting
Contact Details:
FruitiliciousShop no:3,  shailesh bldg.,near cumballa hill hospitalkemps cornerMumbai 36.
Mobile no: 
9967006335
Landline no:  
022-64539911Fruity Delight
5HLQYHQWLQJWKHERXTXHW5H]D.D]HURRQLDQG6XÀ\DQ
6LGGLTXLFRPHWRJHWKHUWREULQJ\RXDFRQFHSWWKDW
can make for innovative gifting this Christmas with 
their project — fruitilicious.
Impressions: Adrian Remedios | Images: Prachi Damle 
Production: Parimal Mulye  
ISSUE 9
VOLUME 10
DECEMBER 2014  RS.125
SUBSCRIBER’S COPY
INTERVIEW  DUARTE SOL    PROFILE   RAVALNATH JOSHIINDIA’S NUMBER 1 IMAGING MAGAZINE!
TRAVELOGUE 
Pondicherry
ISSUE 9 | VOLUME 10 | DECEMBER 2014117
LEARNINGS
WHAT COLOURS MEAN
IMPORTANCE OF FOOD STYLINGUNDERSTANDING LIVE VIEWOPTICAL VIEWFINDER  OR  
ELECTRONIC VIEWFINDER?
REVIEWS OLYMPUS TG-3 • CANON POWERSHOT G7X • OLYMPUS 40-150MM F/2.8 • TOKINA AT-X 70-200MM F/4
PHOTO 
FEATURE
DUOMO DI 
MILANO 
(MILAN CATHEDRAL) 
Digital Platform Partners
www.zinio.com/smartphotography
http://pocketmags.com/nextgenNow read your favourite magazine wherever you go...
Available on PC... Mac... Tablet... or any other handheld device!
Available on
54  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenFood Fetish
Bites
If there’s a party, there must be food. 
To make it simpler, we got top chefs 
across the country to share some of 
their all-time party favourite recipes 
with you. Go on, cook up a storm. 
Impression: Riddhima Seal  Little
GARLIC / 
SUN DRIED TOMATO HUMMUS 
 
Recipe Courtesy: 
mm! Maroosh
YOU NEED
500 gm chick peas
Handful of garlic5 Tbsp olive oil3 Tbsp sundried tomato paste (for sun dried tomato hummus) 1 Tbsp Tahini 2 tsp fresh lemon juiceSalt to taste 3 Tbsp curd 
METHOD
tSoak the chick peas overnight. 
tNow add a hand full of garlic, about 5 Tbsp olive oil, 1 Tbsp Tahini (hulled sesame seeds paste). Add just abt 2 tsp fresh lemon juice, 3 Tbsp curd and salt to taste. Blend all this to a thick paste.
tSprinkle some burnt garlic before serving. Serve with Pita bread.MEW A MAW A 
PANEER JALEBI   
Recipe Courtesy: Chef Rajib 
Mazumder, Executive Sous Chef, Grand Hyatt Goa
YOU NEED
2 ltr milk  
2 Lime for lemon juice 2 tsp milk 1 tsp maida 100 gm dry fruits (chopped finely) 50 gm mawa 1 tsp baking powder  1/ 2 tsp cardamom powder 3-4 cardamom (crushed)  Saffron few strands1 cup sugar 1/2 cup water 1 ltr oil (deep frying) For the garnish: Chopped almonds (badam) few no Saffron (kesar) a few strands
METHOD
tFor the saffron water, dry roast the saffron strands in a small pan for 10 seconds. Add 10 Tbsp of milk and keep aside. 
tBoil the milk then add lemon juice to make fresh chana (hoe made cottage cheese). When the water separates, turn off the flame. Strain and squeeze out the excess water. Rest it for 10 minutes.
tIn another heavy bottom pan, dissolve the sugar in the water and heat till the bubble starts to remove scum. Add the crushed cardamom, saffron water stirring continuously. The syrup should be very thick and sticky. 
tKnead the chana or cottage cheese with cardamom powder, milk, maida, mawa baking powder for at least 10-15 minutes till it become smooth mix dry fruits in the dough. Pinch a small ball of chana and roll into smooth ball. Roll it into a snack like shape twist to end of the roll.
tIn a pan heat oil to medium flame. Slowly put the paneer jalebies in the oil and fry till golden brown. 
tDunk the paneer jalebies immediately in the warm syrup. Cover and let it stand for some time .
tServe the paneer jalebies hot or room temperature.
The Ideal Home and Garden December 201 4  |  55 Food Fetish
BEETROOT 
KI TIKKI   
Recipe Courtesy: 
 Zorawar Kalra, Founder & Managing Director, Massive 
Restaurants Pvt Ltd.
YOU NEED
600 gm Beetroot 
300 gm Carrot120 gm Potatoes (mashed)4 Green Chilly  (deseed & finely chop)1/2” piece Ginger1gm Shahi Zeera2 gm Black Pepper (Crushed)1 Tbsp Corn Flour1 Tbsp Tempura75 gm Breadcrumbs1/4 tsp Chotti Elaichi / Green Cardamom Powder1/8 tsp Javitri / Mace Powder1/4 tsp Cinnamon Powder2 Tbsp Cooking Oil2 Tbsp ButterSalt to tasteMesculum (shredded assorted salad leaves)Micro greens (moong cress) For the Mango Coulis:120 gm ripe Mango Pulp 45 gm Mayonnaise2 tsp Olive OilJuice of 1 LemonFor the Filling:75 gm yoghurt cheese / hung curd8 Cashew nuts (chopped)12 Raisins (chopped)2 Green Chillies (deseed and finely chopped)1/2” piece Ginger (finely chopped)1 Tbs Mint (finely chopped) 
METHOD
For the Mixture: tHeat oil and butter in a frying pan, add shahi zeera, add the ginger and green chilies, black pepper and stir. Then add the grated beetroot and carrot, bhunno/stir-fry (approx 4-6 minutes). 
tThen add potatoes and salt, bhunno/stir-fry until cooked (approx 7-8 minutes) until the moisture has completely evaporated. 
tNow add the remaining ingredients, except corn flour and tempura, stir, remove, adjust the seasoning and cool. 
tMix well and divide into 16 equal portions and make balls.
tPut tempura and corn flour in a bowl, add 140 ml / 1⁄2 cup water and mix well. Take cheesy yoghurt in a bowl; add cashew nuts, raisins, green chillies, ginger and mint. 
For the Patties: tFlatten each ball between the palms to make round patties, place a portion of the filling in the middle of each, seal, make balls again and carefully (ensuring that the filling does not ooze out) flatten into 1/2” thick patties. Refrigerate for 15 minutes. 
tRemove the patties from the refrigerator, dip in tempura and corn flour batter, roll in breadcrumbs and keep aside. 
tPut mango pulp in a blender and pulse to make a puree. 
tRemove and pass puree through a fine mesh sieve. Add other ingredients and mix well.
BEETROOT 
CREPE  
Recipe Courtesy: Chef 
Kshama Prabhu, Executive Chef, The White Owl 
YOU NEED
Beetroot 1 no
100 gm Maida Salt to tasteCrushed black pepper to taste2 eggs 2 tsp chopped parsley 1 ½ cup milk 1 cup cream 1 cup grilled vegetables 2 Tbsp Parmesan cheese  
METHOD
tRoast the beetroot and  puree it. tFor the batter, mix maida, salt and pepper. Whisk in the egg with milk and beetroot puree. Gradually whisk in the mixture with maida. Adjust seasoning and finish off by adding parsley. For filling, grill vegetables like cauliflower, zucchini, carrots, onions, etc.
tAdjust seasoning. 
tFor the sauce, in a pan, sautee some garlic, paprika and add fresh cream.
tWarm and adjust seasoning. 
tStuff the crepes with the filling and parmesan cheese. Warm on a non stick pan and plate. 
tPour some sauce over the crepes and garnish with  fresh parsley.
56  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenBlogger-Speak
WINTER Soirée
MOOD LIGHT:  If you’ve got the ambience right, you’ve 
won half the battle. I’m convinced that my home 
looks its best when bathed in the soft forgiving glow of candles. Diffused light can raise the emotional temperatures in a room and is the perfect antidote to shake off those winter chills. My absolute favourite this season are these exquisite candle holders from Purple Turtles (http://thepurpleturtles.com/).Temperatures have been plummeting and we are taking 
the year end celebration indoors. A successful soirée not only calls for great company, scrumptious food and fl owing conversation and wine but also the perfect party 
décor. With a little thought and planning, holiday hosting can be stress free with you being in control and playing the “ideal hostess” . Here is my list of must have party décor, tips and tricks. 
Sruthi Singh
MAKE ROOM FOR MORE: Comfort is key while entertaining, so 
make sure you provide plentiful seating and perching options 
for your guests. A simple solution to this dilemma is to scatter 
ÁRRUFXVKLRQVDQGIRRWVWRROVVRWKDWJXHVWVFDQJUDERQH
and unwind in casual comfort. India Circus (http://indiacircus.
com/world/) cushion covers in creative colour combos with 
distinct Indian oriented motifs jazz up my living room and add 
WKHSHUIHFWÀQLVKLQJWRXFKIRUDFKHHUIXOSDUW\DPELHQFHShruti Singh of the The East Coast Desi blog lists ways to host 
the perfect house party this season.
Images: Sruthi SinghThe Ideal Home and Garden December 201 4  |  57 Blogger-Speak
TRAY POWER : I just love the portable character of trays. 
They are the perfect alternative to a bar or table top. 
Style a sculptural pedestal with your favorite books and top it off with a tray and you have yourself an instant side table or mini bar! And if you are feeling crafty and are in the mood to experiment, make your own with supplies from Craftslane (http://craftslane.com/newProducts.php)PARTY FAVORS:  Don’t sweat over party favors. Floral 
arrangements put together for the party double as favors. 
At the end of the party, place a Chalkboard sign marked 
“Please Help Yourself”, a few waterproof candy bags and 
colour coordinated ribbons to cinch bags closed. This will 
leave the guests feeling special and making you the Queen 
of entertaining for going that extra mile.
COASTER INDULGENCE:  Using coasters not only makes things 
look elegant and fancy but also keeps the horrendous water rings on furniture at bay. So make sure you dig into your cache and round up all the coasters you’ve got on hand and place them within the guests arm’s reach so that your furniture is safe. If you’re looking for something unique to serve as coasters, consider switching Jaipur blue pottery tiles for regular coasters or shop the Orissa pink stone coasters from Collective Craft (https://www.facebook.com/CollectiveCraft). 
58  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenBlogger-Speak
TEXTURAL DIALOGUE:  Whether you are serving things up 
the family-style or are planning on a formal sit down 
dinner, use your dining table to showcase your personal style. Don’t be afraid to use an idiosyncratic mix of colors, textures and patterns to give the space some depth, dimension and personality. I always like to add a desi touch to my décor and believe in mixing and using what I have on hand. A combination of eco-friendly chattai style table runners, kantha style table mats and YLQWDJHEUDVV6LDPÁDWZDUHDÁHDPDUNHWÀQGGRWKHtrick for me and make it special for my guests. 
STOCK UP ON STALKS:  Flowers are an 
indispensable element in decorating my home 
for a fete!  They are a great way to bring in color 
and instantaneously perk up a space. Ditch the 
conventional vases and consider displaying your 
blooms in unconventional receptacles. “Found objects” 
from the kitchen cabinets such as vintage kettles and 
beer mugs, vinaigrette bottles, ceramic creamers, 
MXJVFRORUHGJREOHWVDQGWULÁHERZOVDUHDZRQGHUIXO
alternative to the conventional vase and are great 
conversation starters.
Gatherings and parties is all about spending time with 
your loved ones, creating memories and just having fun. I’m sure these party tips and tricks are going to keep you calm and help you party on!!!  
 
Sruthi Singh LVDÀQDQFHFRQVXOWDQWGpFRU
enthusiast, design stylist, self-taught 
painter and small business owner at 
The Yellow Bamboo (retails via Etsy and 
specializes in handmade children’s 
artwork). Follow her on  
http://theeastcoastdesi.blogspot.comThe Ideal Home and Garden October 2014  |  59 Shopping Spree
Ideas
60 Wall Art
68 Colour Code
78 The IT Store
ElementtoHaute This Month
60  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
India Fusion by Krsna Mehta,  price on request, Marshalls
Art
 WALLThe Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  61 
If colour play is your thing, think beyond 
the paint brush. These innovative 
wall treatments range from the elegant 
to the unexpected. 
Impressions: Ruhi SinghHaute This MonthHaute This Month
62  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
India Fusion by Krsna Mehta,  price on request, MarshallsBring the  
outside inside with 
this wallpaper. 
From the trees 
to the beautiful 
ÁRZHUVZDOO
coverings can 
make a design 
statement.Haute This Month
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  63 
Yolande Magenta from Clarke & Clarke , Starts from `700 per m, MaishaaGo for a boastful 
motif and the 
subtlest of 
textures to add 
interest to a 
simple space.64  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
Wallpaper from Designers Guild, Starts from `6,000 per roll, F&FPick a  
dark pattern 
for an eye 
catching 
result.Haute This MonthHaute This Month
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  65 
Wallpaper, `120 - `3,000 per sq ft, ElementtoOpt for an 
unconventional 
look that adds 
a quirky feel to 
the space.Haute This Month
66  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
Add style and 
sophistication 
to your wall with 
pretty patterns 
and get the 
balance with 
clean-lined 
furniture.
India Fusion by Krsna Mehta,  price on request, MarshallsHaute This Month
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  67 
India Fusion by Krsna Mehta , price on request, Marshalls
Flower wallpaper, price on request, ElementtoComplement 
your living room 
wall with a 
monochrome 
patterns to  
create a  
warm vibe.Haute This Month
68  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
ColourLight and dark 
come together 
effortlessly to 
make for a chic 
living space.
CodeThe Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  69 
Kansai-NerolacGive your home a seasonal lift with these 
fresh coats of colour.  
Impressions: Benoy SebastianHaute This MonthKansai-NerolacWarm shades 
combined 
with neutrals 
will make 
for a serene 
bedroom 
space.Haute This Month
70  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenHaute This Month
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  71 
Elementto
Opt for 
furniture in 
a deeper 
shade of the 
colour than 
your walls for 
a statement 
look.
Kansai-NerolacHaute This Month
72  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenHaute This Month
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  73 
This classic 
red and white 
combine work 
beautifully to 
make a bold 
statement.
Elementto
Haute This Month
74  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
Your upholstery 
can go a 
long way in 
determining how 
the colour on 
your walls stand 
out.
Dulux
Haute This Month
This pale 
shade of 
yellow is best 
paired with 
simple no-fuss 
clean liness. 
Shalimar Paints
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  75 Ethnic takes on a whole new meaning with 
the vibrant and elegant use of the colourful 
traditional customs of Kerala.
Impressions: Benoy Sebastian & Adrian Remedios
 Images: Prachi Damle
Location: Hotel Shalimar, Kemps Corner, Mumbai
Interiors by: Architect JJ Poonawala
Limited
EditionThe Ideal Home and Garden December 201 4  |  77 
NERIYATHUM
Th e runner on the bed is an innovative use of 
the traditional garment called the Neriyathum 
worn by the womenfolk of Kerala. Th  e handloom 
runner has a beautifully woven gold “kara” or border with a peacock motif. Th  e peacock 
symbolises astounding beauty whilst also resplendently mirroring benovelence and integrity.SUNFLOWERS
Th e fertile land of the Malabar is blessed with 
an abundance of celes tial natural magnifi  cence 
palm-fringed lagoons and pristine backwaters 
dotted with small boats called ‘Th  oni’s” . Th  e 
wall above the bed has sunfl  owers placed in the 
minutely craft  ed and hand painted miniature 
thonis. It is way of conveying positive energy. 
RATTAN CHAIR & URLI
Th e empyrean beauty of kerala has nutured 
rich artistry in its people that can be seen 
in the rattan handiwork on solid timber 
furniture and the bell metal urlis. A mélange 
of both these simple elements is and ode to 
native objet d’art specially handpicked from 
Jew town in Kochi.
Presented by
SLOPING ROOF & OIL RECEPTACLE
Kerala is the mecca of spice trade and an 
exuberant melting pot for the architectural styles from the orient to the occident. Th  e 
Mangalore tiles made of clay form a sloping faux roof with an antique oil receptacle hanging from it adding mystical elegance to the cityscape room.TRADITION
A perfect amalgamation of being a retail store and studio, Baaya, offers an unmatched 
range of folk and cultural art, home accessories and skill-based consultancy services.
Impressions: Benoy Sebastian and Adrian Remedios | Images: Mahesh ReddyDesign meets
78  |  Decemebr 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenThe Ideal Home and Garden December 201 4  |  79 
The IT Store
THE REPUTE
Earlier known as 
Baaya Designs, now shortened to Baaya, is reputed as a design studio and store that blends the best of traditional 
skills with contemporary design. Having moved into a bigger, permanent space, and a recently improved logo, Baaya has a lot on offer. 
Using design and artisan 
skills effectively, the brand has created a store that can stand with its head held as high as any international store in terms of quality, styling and range.
THINK POSITIVE
The theme of the store is inspired by the concept of ‘ Ayaadi’ , which means bringing positive vibrations in living spaces. 80  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
The brand hopes to ignite 
the imagination of anyone seeking to create something different and yet, intrinsic to our culture, be it at home or workspace. Baaya also off  ers its services to 
interior design and architect fi rms, and helps bring in the 
most amazing artisan skills into their interiors.ART FORM
Right from breath taking art panels and artefacts done by renowned craftsmen like Jaidev Baghel, Baaya also has ‘Shola’s’ , a stunning brass Dokra art furniture range, created in collaboration with the talented Italian artist  Shola Carletti and a playful range of tinted wood furniture from 
The IT StoreThe Ideal Home and Garden December 201 4  |  81 The IT Store
82  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenThe IT Store
The Ideal Home and Garden December 201 4  |  83 The IT Store
Furnicheer, a reputed design firm. 
Every quarter, Baaya will hold temporary exhibitions, starting with ergonomically and beautifully designed furniture by Shrikant Nivasarkar and also folkloric, a folk art initiative in textiles.
Contact Details:   
Baaya,  
Prathamesh Tower,  
A   Wing, Ground Floor,
Senapati Bapat Road, 
Raghuvanshi Mills Compound, 
Lower Parel, Mumbai.84  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenArtist-Speak
Celebrating
Energy, power, and the dynamic relationships between animal and 
man are some of the themes that animate Deepak Shinde’s work.
Impressions: Benoy Sebastian
Deepak Shinde’s work is 
deeply rooted in his own 
experiences, through his journey of life. His paintings are a response to what he feels  are an outcome of varying events. Th e changing circumstances 
are depicted through a series of images refl  ecting the inherent 
constancy of the process of change. As an artist, Shinde believes there are three aspects to art:  the emotional, the intellectual and the aesthetic. His instincts, experiences and thoughts act as evolutionary elements in the production of art that reveal itself to the world in a blaze of colours, making his paintings a celebration of hues – not in the thoughtlessly liberal sense but, rather, a celebration of the spirit within. Simple and spontaneous, his work has a distinctly rustic feel. Th  e 
two way movement in his work between the abstraction and the fi guration adds a celebratory 
dynamism and physicality to his canvases. His animal fi  gures - fi sh, monkeys, tigers, 
elephants, bulls, deer, fox, chameleons, parrots   with their gestures and movements and in their abstraction indicate a mythic representation of life processes. His canvases are temptingly pleasing, bathed as they are in a certain philosophical and primordial light.
Based on the testimony 
of Shinde’s paintings, human beings are driven principally by their passions; they become play things rather than the masters of their desires, with reason mulling over in excess the morning aft er. And what they 
accumulate, as they negotiate the treacherous currents of worldly experience, is a wry wisdom rather than a balance of  happiness.
Deepak Shinde
104, Indraprastha IV, Raheja TownshipMalad (East), Mumbai.
Deepak ShindeLIFEShopping Spree
Lifestyle
86 Ideal Living
92 Ideal Getaways
109 Food Fetish
114 Green House
Elementto86  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
Open  
 House
Simple lines, thoughtfully curated  
DFFHQWVDQGWKHULJKWIXUQLWXUHGHÀQHWKH
design elements of Aditya Gupta’s plush 
New Delhi home. 
Impressions: Ruhi Singh | Images: Ankush MariaIdeal LivingThe Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  87 Ideal Living
The best you can expect aft  er a 
long and tiring day is a home that 
radiates a cosy ambience and a visually 
pleasing décor.  Aditya Gupta’s plush home in south Delhi is sophistication married with comfort. “It is crucial to maintain a balance between comfort and statement and being in the furniture business, we know the magic. We do up people’s homes, so why not ours, ” laughs Aditya, founder of Th  e Furniture 
Republic.Spread 800 sq yards, the house features great ideas for outdoor spaces - huge green lawns, fi  gurines 
and sculptures, brassware, pot planters and a variety of fl  owers. “Th  e 
outdoors are done in a way such that the white marble used for fl  ooring and stairs are in 
We Like
Owner’s PRIDE
The Owners: A family of four, 
Aditya, wife Kalpana, their son 
and daughter
The Home: His home occupies a 
built-up area of 15,000 sq ft and 
features a stunning garden.
Location:  Panchsheel Park, 
New Delhi
Rooms:  Living room, dining 
room, seven bedrooms, kitchen 
and a pantry
Décor: A perfect blend of 
classic, contemporary 
and modernIdeal Living
conversation with the greens all 
around, ” shares Aditya. We entered the house only to the more unfolding of stories. With geometrical flooring pattern and a larger than life painting on the wall, the foyer took us to the living and dining area on the left. From modern and subtle to traditional and cozy, the living room is the heart of the house with a no-fuss mantra. “I wanted it simple and clean-lined, inviting a bit of glamour and loads of comfort, ” says Aditya. 
The huge floor to ceiling 
windows on the three sides are just perfect to highlight interior details. For a more sophisticated look, the family decided to go with white marbles, mop inlay work, Burma teak wood windows  and extra high ceilings. ‘The décor pieces in the entire  house are unique in one or the other way. ’ The large antique wooden set in the living area is from Gujarat. The table is made of railway sleeper wood and the top is toughened glass  with steel frame. The other coffee table is sourced from Murano, Italy. TIHG loved the porcelain girl with body tattoos from Germany. 
88  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenNot to mention, all the 
furniture are from The Furniture Republic. The basement of the house is used as an entertainment area complete with a snooker, table tennis, party area and a verandah all around. To avoid the typical basement look, Aditya decided to have large windows, potted plants and a water fountain. The furniture is sourced from Australia. The statement pieces are from Murano, Italy while the Italian leather chairs are hand painted by an artist in India. The wooden clocks are from Portugal. “For a personal 
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  89 Ideal Living90  |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenIdeal Living
touch, I have added a 
large poster photograph of a giraffe which I clicked in Masai Mara, Kenya, ” says Aditya. Step in the second floor and there is an expansive terrace. The place features the greenery in and around Hauz Khas. With two guest bedrooms and a gym, the floor is perfect for a barbecue evening.
“Contemporary furniture 
and architecture, some classical wood work and floor inlay, antiques as decorative accessories along with a few ultra modern accessories sourced from different corners of the world. Lots of family pictures and books! This is our home, ” concludes Aditya.The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  91 Ideal Living
Ideal Getaways
92  |  Decemebr 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
Charm 
 RusticIdeal Getaways
A 19th century hunting lodge, Lakshman Sagar 
encapsulates centuries of history and age-old Marwar 
tradition. Built to host visiting noble families of Rajasthan 
and British emissaries for their hunting escapades, the lodge 
emanates stories of the bygone eras.
Impressions: Benoy Sebastian | Images: Prachi Damle
A BRIEF
Lakshman Sagar was originally a 
royal 19th century hunting lodge, owned by the then Thakur of Raipur. A fascinating destination, where the Mardana (men’s) tower has been converted into a breezy white and blue dining space, with a kitchen below it. Where a 
swimming pool has been cut 
into the rock plateau behind the Zanana (women’s) tower. Day beds, sheltered by thatching of dry vegetation, line one side of the lake. And, where 12 mud and stone cottages are spread out over the 32 acres of pristine landscape.  ACCOMMODATION
Th e 12 cottages are no less stunning 
than the rest of the property. Th  ey’re 
spacious (around 900 square feet each), and have independent bedrooms, living rooms with fi  replaces, private 
plunge pools overlooking the lake, and stone bathrooms with rain showers. 
94  |  Decemebr 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenStriking bright 
pink curtains, 
reminiscent of the 
ORFDOJDUEÁRZLQJ
from the windows 
of the Zanana 
creates a picture 
perfect impression.
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  95 Ideal Getaways96  |  Decemebr 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
The interiors are brightly 
decorated with local influences, creating an experience of the nuances of village life. From a large wind chime, installation of brass vessels like lotas , 
belans  (rolling pins) and 
mathinis  (butter churners) 
to a jalaebi patal  as a 
Ideal GetawaysIdeal Getaways
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  97 98  |  Decemebr 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
Lakshman 
6DJDUUHÁHFWV
sustainable living 
and local culture 
in all its nooks 
and corners. 
Ideal GetawaysIdeal Getaways
keyholder and below it a shoe 
cleaner from mini brooms, the interiors completely refl  ect the 
local culture. 
FOOD AND DINING
The food at Lakshman Sagar is a delightful surprise. It’s pure North India treat - and lots of it. Meals are pre-set. Breakfast is simple, but perfect: potato-stuffed parathas (flat bread) with homemade yoghurt and spicy pickles; eggs cooked to order; fruit salad and fresh-pressed sweet lime juice. Make sure you join in the field breakfast, set in front of a local farmer’s hut and watch the women make wheat bhakri  over 
an earthen oven. Meals are served inside the open-air Mardana, overlooking the lake or sometimes in the pretty little Zanana dining rooms (on special requests), or privately if you prefer.
CONTACT DETAILS
Lakshman Sagar 
P.O. Haripur, District Pali
Rajasthan.
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  99 FactorPLUSHNouveau Arrival
The Plus House, 
located in Panipat, 
Haryana, is an 
amalgamation of 
luxury and style.
Impressions: Ruhi Singh 
 Images: Saptorshi 
Majumdar
100   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
Name of the Project: The Plus House
Location: Panipat, Haryana
Client: Payal & Vinod Juneja
Built-up Area: 3,650 sq ft
Number of towers: One
Design Team: Studio An-V-Thot 
Architects Pvt. Ltd.
FACTFILENouveau Arrival
The Ideal Home and Garden December 201 4  |  101  102   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenNouveau Arrival
The Ideal Home and Garden December 201 4  |  103  Nouveau Arrival
Located in Panipat, Haryana and 
spread across an area of 3,650 sq 
ft, the Plus House owned by Payal and Vinod Juneja is a good mix of the modern as well as the traditional aspect of design. 
Architects Ankita Sweety and 
Pratyoosh Chandan perceived the house as a creation of rectangles within a square, which clearly took them to benefiting proportions during the planning. This was the answer to a rather questionable site which sat on an almost square plot of 55’ x 58’ , thus generating a challenge as well as curiosity to achieve depth and sight, ” says Pratyoosh.
The facade of the house has a complete 
25’ high structure which can be seen as volumes and voids sharing spaces, overlapping and inter changing their behavior as well as presence. The vertical edge of the corner is sliced open in a tapered hugging manner with MS pergola on the roof level adding the play of shadows and light. The architects have used MS Jali at eminent places  for a complete traditional Indian effect. The use of textured orange paint balances its harmony through the cladding of Dholpur stone on to the left tower. The house caters to a family of four that revolves around and about a dense green focal point. “The impact of this created courtyard can be felt from the entrance as well as the private areas of the house, ” says Pratyoosh. Sweety adds that “the ‘Plus’ is 
104   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenNouveau Arrival
actually the two axes which has generated 
four rectangles within a square that goes from one end to the other. ” The design leads to a comfortable flow of air and light throughout the house.
The courtyard features a sunken pebble 
bed which comes with a glass top and acts as a centrestage for the house. Italian stone ‘Diana’ has been used majorly for flooring. “We have also used wooden flooring at few places to add warmth. Also, the addition of many sit out zones within the house was planned and  placed to add stories, ” shares Sweety. The use of Jali as a partitions have been matched with the furniture’s design. The ceiling of the lobby leads to the court  and is finished with veneer backed  by commercial board. The architects  have addwed colours in different areas of the house to add life. The puja room  is done in black onyx, the kitchen  features a beautiful sea green lacquered glass while a wallpaper adorns the  dining wall.The Ideal Home and Garden December 201 4  |  105  Nouveau Arrival
“Traditional inserts can be seen in 
the rear door leading to the backyard which overlooks the coffee corner through the double height ceiling, ” explains Pratyoosh.  The backyard hosts a small shower pool adjoining the garden. A small bar sits as a vertical extension to the drawing room at the mezzanine level with a small pantry, a washroom and a private balcony. The entire area is backlit by onyx stone, white PU pigment paint and dark veneer. The dark green upholstery fabric of furniture brings youthfulness. “The master bedroom and the children’s 106   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
Nouveau Arrival
bedroom are designed to evolve as 
two characters with former being warm and the latter being young, ” shares the architects. 
Th e master bedroom has a play of 
browns and off  -whites  with the use of Victorian wallpaper and 
neo-victorian wall lights as well as a chandelier. Th  e study area in the 
kid’s room has a glossy pigment paint which is enhanced with pastel green laminate adding to the blue and white pin board. Th  e same colour The Ideal Home and Garden December 201 4  |  107  Nouveau Arrival
pattern is repeated on the rugs and 
curtains. Many hanging lights and custom-made ceiling lights have been used throughout the house to provide glamour and warmth. Altogether, it’s a house with spaces of varying identities yet similar character. Subscribe 
on the move 
sms ‘SUBS SP’  
to 56161Subscribe on email  
subscriptions@nextgenpublishing.netSubscribe online
http://www.nextgenpublishing.in/subs
YOUR DETAILS  (ALL DETAILS IN CAPITAL LETTERS)
Name: Mr/Ms
OccupationDate of birthAddress
City 
    State
Pincode     Email
Phone (Off)        Phone (Res)
Mobile No.
Please send me latest updates on Special Offers and Events of Smart Photography     Kindly draw the cheque/DD/PO in favor of NEXT GEN PUBLISHING LTD. (Please add 
Rs. 20/- extra for outstation cheque) Please Find enclosed 
Cheque/DD no.  Dated 
Bank  
Branch 
Or please charge my credit card        Visa       MasterCard       
Card No.        
Card expiry date
Name  (as appears on card)
Date  Signature
TO GIFT A SUBSCRIPTION (ALL DETAILS IN CAPITAL LETTERS)
Please ﬁ  ll out both the recipient’s details, below, and your details above. To gift more 
than one subscription, please provide address details on a separate sheet.
Name: Mr/Ms
Occupation
Date of birth
Address
City State
Pincode  Email 
Phone (Off)  Phone (Res)Please complete the order form and mail it to us at Next Gen Publishing Ltd., 
2nd Floor, C Wing, Trade World, Kamala Mills Compound, S.B.Marg, Lower Parel (W). Mumbai 400013Y ou can also fax the order for credit card purchases to +91 22 2495 5394For clarifi  cations, email: subscriptions@nextgenpublishing.net or call +91 22 4352 5252
TERMS AND CONDITIONS: Please allow 4-5 weeks for processing of your subscription. Copies will be sent by 
ordinary post only. Next Gen Publishing will not be responsible for postal delay, transit loses or mutilation of cop-ies. No cancellation of subscriptions will be entertained after commencement of subscription. Please mention your name and address on the reverse of your DD/Cheque. All disputes are subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of courts in Mumbai only. 
December 2014*Cash Discount Offer
  Pay ` 3000 for 3 Y ears subscription and save ` 1500 (33% Discount) on the cover price
  Pay ` 1200 for 1 Y ear subscription and save ` 300 (20% Discount) on the cover price
International rate - 1 Year INR Rs. 7500 or USD 125 for by air mail postSUBSCRIBE NOW & 
AVAIL SPECIAL DISCOUNTS 
CALL +91 22 4352 5252
Monday - Friday, 9.00 am to 5.30 pm
subscriptions@nextgenpublishing.netSubscribe using
Credit Card over the phoneNewSpecial Subscription Offer
INDIA’S NUMBER 1 IMAGING MAGAZINE!ISSUE 6
VOLUME 09
SEPTEMBER 2013  
SUBSCRIBER’S COPYRS.125
● SOFTWARE PREVIEW: PHOTOSHOP CREATIVE CLOUD  ● PROFESSIONAL TECHNIQUE: SHOOTING ALBUM COVERSINTERVIEW
SURAJ DAS
LEARNING: STAR TRAIL
 PHOTOGRAPHY
TUTORIAL: EXPOSURE EXPOSED
REVIEWED
PENTAX K30180  ISSUEPAGE
INDIA’S NUMBER 1 IMAGING MAGAZINE!SUBSCRIBER’S COPYREVIEWS: CANON EOS 70D  ● SAMSUNG GALAXY S4 ZOOM  ● PENTAX K-50
WEDDING SPECIAL
VINAYAK DAS AND SNIGDHA SHEEL
NIKLESH MALKANI
ANAND RATHI AND ABHINAV SAH
INTERVIEW
KIRAN POONACHA
LEGAL MATTERS 
SENIOR ADVOCATE 
ADHIK SHIRODKAR SPEAKS
TUTORIAL 
HIGHLIGHT WARNING AND HISTOGRAM
ALSO REVIEWED
OLYMPUS 45MM F/1.8 MSC
SIGMA 18-35MM F/1.8 DC HSM
Canon EOS 70D
Pentax K-50
16 page SONY supplement Free
with November 2013 issue.INDIA’S NUMBER 1 IMAGING MAGAZINE!ISSUE 8
VOLUME 09
NOVEMBER 2013  RS.125
INDIA’S NUMBER 1 IMAGING MAGAZINE!ISSUE 7
VOLUME 09
OCTOBER 2013  SUBSCRIBER’S COPYRS.125THE BIG FIGHT:  NORMAL LENSES  ● PREMIUM COMPACTS  ● TOUGH CAMERAS
BASIC TIPS FOR 
WONDERFUL 
MACROS
ALL ABOUT 
MIRRORLESS 
CAMERAS
TRAVEL 
FEATURE
VARANASI
EXPERT TECHNIQUES
PHOTOGRAPHING PETS
HOW TO PHOTOGRAPH BABIES
INTERVIEWS
KAUSHIK BHATIA
VINCENT VERSACE
For the very best techniques, advice and images from the world of photography, 
look no further than Smart Photography magazine - India’s biggest photography magazine.
From reviews on SLRs, Compacts and Smartphones to advice and tips on 
photography techniques, Smart Photography Magazine promises to provide you with EVERYTHING you require to capture the best possible shots.   
Smart Photography Magazine is the perfect read for anyone wanting to get more 
from their camera. It teaches you all the camera skills you need, inspires creativity, and keeps you informed of the latest photo gear launches. 
Smart Photography Magazine is the fi  rst choice for photographers looking to take 
better pictures and enhance their images. With easy-to-follow projects, tips and 
techniques, you can learn new photo and imaging skills the smart way.
Here are 4 really good reasons!Why would you buy a Smart Photography subscription? 
1 Save up to 33% on 
cover prices
2Never miss an issue again
3 Delivered free to your door
4And most important of all, a seriously good 
quality magazine...Brunch TIME
Cool recipes to try while you lounge around the pool 
and catch up on some goss!
Impressions: Ruhi Singh | Images: Ankush Maria | Styling: Pooja Dev Sharma  
Location: Smokeys BBQ and Grill, Masjid Moth, Greater Kailash, Part 2, New Delhi  
Production: Chef Yograj Chauhan
The Ideal Home and Garden Decemebr 201 4  |  109  Food Fetish110   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenFood Fetish
SPICY CHICKEN HOT DOG
YOU NEED
120 gms chicken breast
30 gms reshampati chilies30 gms garlic, 30 gms onion30 gms cheddar cheese20 gms spread cheese10 ml olive oil1 hot dog bun3 gms parsley30 gms lemon
3 gms chilli flakes
METHOD
For the stuffing:
tCut small chunks of chicken breast. 
Take medium sized pan, put olive oil, onion and garlic.
tAdd chicken, parsley, salt, pepper, lemon juice, chilli flakes, and reshampatti chilli paste. Sauté for about 5 to 7 minutes.tCut the hot dog bread through the middle and apply butter.. Bake in an open OTG. 
tMake sure the bread gets a little crisp on the inside.
tPut the chicken mixture from the pan, add some cheddar cheese on the top and bake in the oven till the cheese melts. 
tAt the finishing stage add some cheese spread.BEETROOT AND OAK 
ASH CHEVRE’ 
 
YOU NEED
200 gms beetroot
50 ml balsamic vinegar30 ml raspberry vinegar (Reduce it over medium flame until it turns thick)20 gms garlic (finely chopped)120 gms lettuce (mixed variety)100 ml passion fruit puree 15 ml olive oil30 gms French bread20 gms chevre cheese
METHOD
tRoast the beetroot in the oven for about 3 to 4 hours and cut it into big chunks. 
tMarinate them overnight in balsamic vinegar. 
tAdd garlic and cheese to make a thick paste. 
tSpread it on thin slices of french bread.
tTake all the lettuce in a bowl. 
tSeason with salt and pepper. 
tAdd passion fruit purée, raspberry vinegar and olive oil. 
tPlace the salad on a chilled plate with the marinated beetroot and French bread.
Food Fetish
112   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenFood Fetish
JOHN DORY WITH SMOKED 
SHIMLA CHILLI 
 
YOU NEED
200 gms John dory Fish
80 gms Bhavnagri Chilies30 gms cream4 gms dill5 ml olive oil5 gms salt5 gms pepper30 gms lemon 3 gms parsley20 gms sundried tomato80 gms risotto (80 percent cooked)30 gms plum tomato10 gms grana cheese20 gms onion (chopped)20 gms garlic1 side salad (Iceberg and Romaine lettuce with vinaigrette dressing)10 gms butter 5 ml white wine 30 gms spinach20 gms garlic paste3 gms chilli flakes3 gms thyme
METHOD
tMarinate the john dory with lemon juice, salt and pepper. 
tPut some butter in a pan and pan-sear john dory fish for about 5 to 7 minutes. 
tAdd thyme at the finishing stage.
tAdd olive oil, onion, garlic, salt and pepper to another pan. 
tThen add risotto, plum tomato and sun dried tomato at the finishing stage. 
tAdd some sunflower seeds and 
grana cheese. 
tAdd white wine and cook for about 
3 to 5 minutes.
tNow, roast the bell peppers and make purée. 
tAdd cream, salt and pepper. 
tGarnish it with parsley. 
tServe the tomato risotto, pan seared john dory with the bell pepper sauce.PEELI MIRCH RISOTTO 
 
YOU NEED
150 gms risotto30 gms river sole fish10 gms kalamari fish40 gms prawns3-5 gms peeli mirch powder20-30 gms Smokeys Style yellow pepper purée (smoke yellow pepper and peel the skin, then make a puree out of it)30 ml white wine10 gms onion5 gms garlic15 ml extra virgin olive oil100 ml fish stock
METHOD
tCook the risotto in onion and garlic for about 25 to 30 minutes in boiling water.
tIn a large sauté pan, heat oil over medium heat. Add onions, salt and pepper. 
tSaute until the onions are slightly soft. Add fish stock and garlic. Bring the mixture to a boil and reduce the heat to medium. 
tSimmer for about six minutes. Add risotto and let it simmer for 12 minutes, stir constantly.
tClean, trim and dice the seafood. 
Add salt, pepper and Smokey’s style yellow pepper purée. 
tAdd seafood in the risotto pan and 
continue to cook for six minutes. 
tAdd butter, cream, cheese, and white wine. 
tSimmer for 2 minutes, stirring constantly. Take it off the heat. 
tPlace the risotto in the centre of each shallow bowl. 
tGarnish with grated grana padanocheese.
Food Fetish
The Ideal Home and Garden December 201 4  |  113  Style LOUNGE 
IN
TIHG rounds up the best ways to enjoy 
your time in the sun this winter.
Impressions Ruhi Singh Green House
114   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenAmata Daybed, 
`50,000 onwards, World BazaarThe Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  115  Green House
The Ideal Home and Garden suggests    The Ideal Home and Garden suggests 
Relax 
on these 
maintenance 
free sun 
loungers.
Roman recliner, 
price on request, Agua
Lounge, `75,000, Patios
Mermaid byKenneth Cobonpue, price on request, IDUS
Lounger, price on request, Pallate
Verve range lounger from Loom Craft, price on request, Wicker World116   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenGreen House
Lounger with umbrella, 
price on request, AguaRoman lounger , price 
on request, Agua
Locsin lounger
, 
`50,000 onwards, 
W
orld Bazaar
The Ideal Home and Garden suggests    The Ideal Home and Garden suggestsLuxury 
loungers 
are ideal for 
lounging by 
the poolside.Green House
The Ideal Home and Garden suggests    The Ideal Home and Garden suggestsAdd 
an oomph 
to your 
outdoors with 
stylish designs 
and colourful 
cushions.
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  117  Round lounge, 
`75,000, Patios
Hagia day bed, `2,15,000, IDUSLoungers, price on request, Pallate
Chaise lounge from Caneline, `90,000 onwards, International Furniture Brands 118   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenGreen House
1RPDWWHUWKHRFFDVLRQÁRZHUVFDQFUHDWHDPDJLFDODPELHQFH
DOPRVWDQ\ZKHUH7,+*VXJJHVWVZD\VWRDGGFKHHUWR\RXUVSHFLD O
JDWKHULQJVZLWKWKHVHEORRPLQJEHDXWLHV
Impressions: Ruhi SinghFlower ARTThe Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  119  
*UHHQ+RXVH
3DUXO*XSWD
$WXO3UDWDS&KDXKDQ120   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenGreen House
0HPRU\0DNHUV  
0HPRU\0DNHUV  
,PDJHVKDVWUD  
0HPRU\0DNHUV  
,PDJHVKDVWUD  
0HPRU\0DNHUV  
0HPRU\0DNHUV  
0HPRU\0DNHUV1
2
3 4The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  121  Green House
$VWDSOHDW,QGLDQZHGGLQJDQGWUDGLWLRQDO
GRVWKHPDULJROGLVRQHRIWKHPRVWEHDXWLIXOÁRZHUVWRZRUNZLWK7KHFRORXURIWKLVÁRZHULVFRPSOHPHQWHGZLWKIXFKVLDEXUQWRUDQJHOLPHJUHHQSXUSOHDOOZKLWHDQGJROGIDEULF0DULJROGGHFRUZKHQSDLUHGZLWKEUDVVZDUHDQGÁRUDOFDQGOHVFDQFUHDWHPDJLF
5678122   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenGreen House
.DYLWD6LQJK,QWHULRUV
3DUXO*XSWD
3DUXO*XSWD
%RXJDLQYLOOD'HVLJQV%RXJDLQYLOOD'HVLJQV
7KH)ODJVKLS6WRUH  
E\)HUQV13HWDOV
$WXO3UDWDS&KDXKDQ1
23The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  123  *UHHQ+RXVH
4
$EHDXWLIXOFHQWUHSLHFH
ZRUNVEHVWIRUDKRPHO\GRDVDJDLQVWJRLQJRYHUERDUG3HUIHFWIRUDGD\JDWKHULQJVLOYHUYDVHVIXOORIFRORXUGÁRZHUVZLOOZRUNEHDXWLIXOO\IRUDZLQWHUJDUGHQSDUW\7DNHWKHSDUW\LQGRRUVZLWKJDOYDQLVHGWLQEXFNHWVÀOOHGZLWKSHRQLHVDQGFDUQDWLRQV
56
7124   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenGreen House
7KH)ODJVKLS6WRUH  
E\)HUQV13HWDOV
3DUXO*XSWD
0HPRU\0DNHUV
0HPRU\0DNHUV0HPRU\0DNHUV0HPRU\0DNHUV
3DUXO*XSWD3DUXO*XSWD1
2
4
583
67:KLWHEORRPVZRUNEHVWZKHQLWFRPHVWRSXWWLQJ
WRJHWKHUDJRUJHRXVHYHQLQJGR*RRYHUERDUGZLWKWKHQXPEHURIEORRPV6HWDJDLQVWOXVKOHDYHVWKLVPDNHVIRUDORRNWKDWLVVRSKLVWLFDWHGDQGRKVRVH[\
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  125  *UHHQ+RXVH126   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden*UHHQ+RXVH
3
1
2
40HPRU\0DNHUV
,PDJHVKDVWUD
7KH)ODJVKLS6WRUH
E\)HUQV13HWDOV
6WXGLR1HHODEK
%RXJDLQYLOOD'HVLJQV
6WXGLR1HHODEK
0HPRU\0DNHUV
%RXJDLQYLOOD'HVLJQVThe Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  127  Green House
5678)UHVKDQGHQHUJHWLFWKHFODVVLFURVHZRUNV
EHDXWLIXOO\IRUDOORFFDVLRQV$OO\RXQHHGLVWRJDWKHUWKHVHJRUJHRXVEORVVRPVLQWRDUUDQJHPHQWVWKDWVKLQHLQWKHLUVLPSOLFLW\<RXGRQ·WQHHGGR]HQVRIURVHVWRPDNHIRUDVSHFWDFXODUDSSHDO/HVVLVPRUHKHUHEvent
128   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenThe  Grand Show
ET Acetech, the world’s third and Asia’s 
largest exhibition on architecture, construction, design and building materials is a class apart platform for consumers and exhibitors alike. 
Impressions: Benoy SebastianThe world’s third and 
Asia’s largest exhibition 
on architecture, construction, design and building materials - ET ACETECH, was held from November 6th to November 9th 2014 at the Bombay Exhibition Centre, Mumbai. Conceptualised and executed by ABEC Exhibitions & Conferences Private Limited, ET ACETECH was a class-apart platform and an effort designed to drive the building industry by bridging the consumer-supplier gap.
Eminent dignitaries from 
various fields graced the occasion during the opening ceremony. A few prominent names that were present - Niranjan Hiranandani of Hiranandani Group, Ashish Raheja of Raheja Universal, Ar. Hafeez Contractor of Architect Hafeez Contractor, Ar. Chris Bubb from Fosters+Partner,  Ar. Arunjot Singh Bhalla of RSP Design, Kamal Khetan of Sunteck Realty, Suzanne Khan of Charcoal Project, Parag Munot from Kalpataru,  V . Srinivasan of CRISIL, claudio bellini Ar. Claudio Bellini from Claudio Bellini Studio and Kaiwan Mehta of Domus India.  
The grand show was staged 
around a vast expanse of two million square feet area. There were more than 1,625 exhibitors from across India. An unprecedented 
Review
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  129  large number of entries 
were accepted by ABEC FOR ET ACETECH. After an internal scrutiny by ABEC along with its official tabulators Ernst & Y oung, 50 top brands were shortlisted to display their innovative products, services and technologies before the esteemed jury panel comprising of more than 100 renowned architects, designers and builders from across the country.  Just to give you an insight who were in charge of the panel - Anita Arjundas, Niranjan Hiranandani, Ashish Raheja, Bindu Oberoi, Sandeep Runwal, Manju Y agnik, Ar. Y atin Patel, Ar. Zarir Mullan, Ar. Seema Puri Mullan, Ar. Sonmoy Chatterjee, Ar.Kalhan Mattoo, Ar. Vivek Bhole and Ar. Sonali Bhagwati.
Aft er a lot of deliberation 
and brainstorming, 21 
products were declared 
winners. Th  e 21 winning 
products were then displayed 
on the splendid ‘Video Wall’ 
at the venue on  November 
6.  Th  ere were three top 
winners. Th  e Gold Winner was 
Th yssenKrupp Elevator (India) 
Pvt Ltd, the Silver accolade was 
won by Inpod and the Bronze prize 
was given to Rocland Pvt. Ltd. 
With the huge success of its Mumbai 
exhibition, Th  e Economic Times 
ACETECH 2014 has taken the 
tradeshow industry a notch higher. 
At the ET ACETECH Mumbai, fi  nest 
national and international brands 
interacted and conducted business 
with eminent architects, real estate 
developers, hoteliers, equity investors 
in infrastructure, builders, engineers 
and designers, from across the 
globe. Buyers, clients and suppliers 
assembled at the show and shared 
their ideas from a wide variety of 
options available for their respective 
businesses. ET ACETECH will 
next be hosted in Bengaluru from 
28th-30th November 2014 at BIEC 
followed by Delhi, Kolkata and 
Ahmedabad. ACETECH is also all 
set to host Design Wall’s 7th edition on 12th December 2014 at Th  e 
Leela, Chanakyapuri, New Delhi.
To provide its trade show a 
truly holistic approach, ET 
ACETECH has left   no stone 
unturned. Th  e future shows 
will further fascinate, motivate 
and encourage personnel of 
architecture, construction and the design industry.
For more details, you can get send 
a mail at info@etacetech.com/
urvashi.c@abec.asia
Event
130   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden132   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenEvent
The stage is set. It’s once again 
time for the biggest décor 
show of them all. Synonymous with being the hotspot to showcase the latest in home décor designs and trends for the last 20 years, the world’s leading trade show - the Maison & Objet Paris is scheduled to be held between January 23-27, 2015. Th  e show which goes a long 
way in determining the décor trends for the year ahead, is a delightful platform for consumers and traders alike.
Inspired by the theme of ‘Sharing’ , 
Maison De Objet 2015 will off  er trends in decoration, furniture, accessories, textiles, fragrances, the world of children, tableware, the trendy and creative show is an ideal platform to discover new concepts and innovations.
We are looking forward to designs 
from renowed interior labels such as Fendi, DAUM, JNL, Meissen Home, Ralph Lauren Home, Sieger, Antonio Lupi, Bernardaud.
DESTINATION PARIS
The Paris chapter of Maison & Objet 2015 will have 
leading names from the interior world showcase their latest collection.
Fillioux & Fillioux -  
Mathieu Lustrerie
Jamie Hayon
Francis Amiand
Greg Sevaz - Gilles NouailhacThe Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  133  Event
Aft er the phenomenal success 
of the 22nd Architect of the Y ear 
Awards held in Chennai last year, J.K. 
Cement Ltd hosted the much awaited 23rd edition of the Annual Architect of the Y ear Award in Lucknow.
Ram Naik, Hon’ble Governor, Uttar 
Pradesh graced the occasion as the chief guest. Th  e 11 recipients 
were selected out of the 200 entries through careful examination and scrutiny of projects by an esteemed jury aft  er intense debates and 
deliberations. Th  e jury was chaired by Y adupati Singhania, Managing Director, J.K. Cement Ltd. Th  e 
other jury members included senior professionals from the Indian architect community. 
Architect of the year Awards were 
given in diff  erent categories like 
Green Architecture Award (GAA), Indian Architecture Award (IAA) – (Private Residence, Public Building, Group Housing and Restoration Conservation Rehabilitation), Indian State Architecture Award (ISAA) and Focus Countries Architecture Award (FCAA).  Th e revolving category for 
23rd AYA was ‘Restoration, Conservation & Rehabilitation. ’ Th  e 
Great Masters Award / Chairman Award for lifetime / outstanding contribution to architecture, which is given once in three years, was presented this year to Shiv Dutt Sharma from Chandigarh. Th  e 
Green Architecture award was given to Sanjay M. Patil from Nashik, for his project YCMOU Library and Multimedia Centre, Nashik. Th  e 
Indian Architecture Award was bagged by Sanjay Mohe, Bangalore for his project Rohan Mithila, Pune among many other awards.
Night of Glory
23RD 
ANNUAL 
ARCHITECT 
OF THE YEAR 
AW ARDSoul Space
134   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
LuxuryHAVEN OF 
Plush interiors and luxurious treatments come 
together at the Spa la Vie by L’Occitane to help 
you relax your senses completely.
Impressions: Adrian Remedios  Images: Prachi DamleSoul Space
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  135  
Spa la Vie by 
L ’Occitane is a 
wellness sanctuary spread across an area of  8,000 sq.ft  , designed to 
escape the humdrum of the city that is Mumbai. While the treatments are tailormade for you, the spa also has a 20 ft  . 
green wall, open spaces, generous natural light, water ensconced lounge, a private spa courtyard and a retail area for product display. 
STEP IN
Th e spa houses seven 
treatment rooms, including three single treatment rooms, two VIP couple suites, one Ayurveda room, one heated stone hammam and the vichy shower 136   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
Soul Space
room. Each of the rooms have a 
name assigned, which represents the ingredients used in the signature treatments. Th  e rooms, 
named Shea, Angelica, Almond, Verdon, Hammam, Tulsi and Immortelle are assigned based on the treatment you pick. 
OPULENT INDULGENCE
Th e journey, as they call it, begins 
with a warm welcome and an introduction to the spa followed by a  tour of the space. Freshly sterilised slippers are provided the moment you enter and is followed by the signature tea served hot to detoxify your body and boost your immune system. 
Th e treatment begins with a 
soothing steam bath to open 
the pores and a calming foot ritual done with rose powder. The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  137  
During the foot ritual, your 
therapist will quickly brief you about the procedure and benefi  ts 
of the treatment. As far as the body wraps are concerned, the self-heating action of the wrap will stimulate micro-circulation, while the clay and essential oils will deeply purify the body, help release toxins and address water retention. While the wrap is left   
to do its job, the therapist will perform a relaxing scalp and foot massage to keep you pampered. Aft er the wrap, you're ready to 
receive L ’Occitane’s signature relaxing Aromachologie Massage. Y ou also have a choice between 
A warm herbal 
tea is just the right 
thing to keep you 
calm and cool during 
the session.
Soul SpaceSoul Space
138   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and Garden
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  139  
Contact Details:  
Spa la Vie by L’Occitane
Apollo Mills Compound
adjacent to Lodha Bellissimo
NM Joshi Marg, Lower Parel
Mumbai.
Call: 0(22) 2305 9055 Chinese acupressure and the 
Balinese massage. Th  ese techniques 
come together to stimulate circulation and ease tensions while essential oils of lavender, tea tree and geranium ensure complete relaxation.
AN EXCITING ESCAPE
If you're looking for a place to throw your next bash, Spa la Vie by L ’Occitane gives you a unique and ideal option for a spa party. Bridal shower, birthday, wine tastings - the spa party is fast becoming a popular way to get together and enjoy a spa tasting session, including manicures, pedicures and mini massages while sipping on champagne and nibbling on some delicious snacks. Go on, indulge in the lap of luxury.
Soul Space140   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenStore  Map
ANDYY HOME 
F 213/D, Old MB Road
Lado Sarai, New Delhi 
ANEK DESIGNS
www.anekdesigns.com 
ANEMOS
Krishna House, Ground Floor, Raghuvanshi EstateSenapati Bapat MargLower Parel, Mumbai 13Call: (022) 24934306 
AURO CANDLES
aurocandles.com 
ARIA INTERIOR
No.56, Ground Floor, Jacaranda MargDLF Phase 2Gurgaon, Haryana – 122001 www.ariainterior.com
ARTANDDECORS.COM
www.artanddecors.com 
BAAYA DESIGN 
11/12, Raghuwanshi  Mills CompoundLower Parel, Mumbai - 400013 Call: (022) 6521 0165 
BATHLINE SENSATIONS
www.bathlineindia.com 
BASALTE
Plot No. 36, 1st FloorSector 18, HUDA Ind. EstateGurgaon 122015Call: (0124) 4737900 
BOMBAY DYEING
www.bombaydyeing.com BONITA
www.bonitaindia.com 
BUZZARIA  
Bhram House F/343 Lado SaraiOld M.B. Road, MehrauliNear Crescent, New Delhi
CARPET COUTURE
F-213 A, Lado Sarai, New DelhiCall: (011) 4167 7730 
CASA PARADOX
The Gallery on MGMG Road, New Delhi
CHRISTOPHER GUY  
(Available at) Ace Maison Experience CenterU-49-56, Hyatt RegencyBhikaji Cama Place, Ring Road, New Delhi-110066Call: 9999966702
COCOON FINE RUGS
www.cocooncarpets.com 
CLAY CRAFT
www.claycraftindia.com 
CRAFTSVILLA
www.craftsvilla.com 
DELTA FAUCET
www.deltafaucet.co.in 
DULUX
Azko Nobel India LimitedDLF Cyber TerracesBuilding No.5, Tower A20th Floor DLF Cyber City Phase III Gurgaon – 122 002
ECO CORNER
Shop No. 16, Level 1 Skyzone, High Street PhoenixLower Parel, Mumbai 400013Call: (022) 30042350ELICA
www.elicaindia.com 
ELECTROLUX
www.electrolux.com 
ELITE
www.eliteliving.co.in 
EPISODE
N-10, Greater Kailash 1 MarketNew Delhi 110048.Call: (011) 2923 7773/4 www.episodesilver.com
ETHNIC KRAFT
M-191, M-Block MarketGreater Kailash Part 2,Delhi- 110048 
ESSENTIA ENVIRONMENT
E - 40, South City I, Gurgaon 
EVOK
Unit No 301-302, 3rd Floor Park Centra, Sec.-30, Gurgaon-122001 Call (0124) 4779200 
F&F (FLOORS N 
FURNISHINGS)
Kirti Nagar
2/12 warehousing schemeKirti Nager, New Delhi 110015Call: (011) 25441161website: fandf.in 
FAB INDIA
www.fabindia.com 
FABMART.COM 
www.fabmart.com 
FABFURNISH.COM
www.fabfurnish.com 
FASHIONANDYOU 
fashionandyou.comFENESTA
Plot No. 52, Sector – 32Gurgaon, Haryana Call: (0124) 4513701/02 
FISHER & PAYKEL
D-8, Sitapuri, Pankha RoadNear Chanakya Place -1New Delhi - 110045Call: (011) 25635410 
FURNCRAFT DE’COLLAGE
125 Shahpur Jat New Delhi
GIFTEASE.COM
www.giftease.com 
GODREJ
www.godrejappliances.com 
GOOD EARTH 
Raghuvanshi Mills CompoundSenapati Bapat Marg,  Mumbai 400013 Call: (022) 2495 1954  
GLACIAL LIGHT
www.glaciallight.com
GRANDEUR INTERIORS
C–158, Okhla Phase 1New Delhi – 110048 
GREEN CARPET
www.greencarpet.in 
GROHE
www.grohe.com 
HAFELE INDIA 
Häfele Mumbai Design Center2 Filix Building, LBS Marg, Bhandup (W), Mumbai - 78Call: (022) 25969660Häfele India Pvt. Ltd.D - 89, 1st Floor, Okhla Phase - I, New Delhi 110 020Phone +91 11 6657 4999 
142   |  December 2014  The Ideal Home and GardenStore Map
HINDWARE
Plot No. 43, ShironaTurn
Thane - Belapur Rd, Sector 1, Nerul, Navi MumbaiMaharashtra 400706 
HOME CENTRE
Phoenix Mills Compound462, Senapati Bapat MargLower Parel, M umbai 400013Call: (022) 42304646
HOME ETTU 
The Gallery on MG108-109, Ground FloorMG Road,  New Delhi
HOME NEEDS ONLINE
www.homeneedsonline.com 
HOME TOWN 
247 Park,  Hincon HouseLBS Marg,  Vikhroli (W), MumbaiCall: (022) 61775200 
HOME SHOP 18 
www.homeshop18.com
HOUSEPROUD 
www.houseproud.in 
HOUSE OF DESIGN
www.houseofdesign.co.ininfo@houseofdesign.co.in 
IDUS 
10/57, Kirti Nagar Industrial AreaNew Delhi 110 015Call: (011) 45888000
I’M CENTRE FOR 
APPLIED ARTS
A-15, Lajpat Nagar-II
New Delhi-110024Call: (011) 29832223 
INDI STORE
www.indi-store.com
INDIA CIRCUS 
www.indiacircus.comINTERARTS
www.interarts.in 
INDIA AUGUST
Pocket K, Sector 18, Noida 
INV HOME
Plot No. 348Sultanpur, M.G Road New Delhi- 110 030Call: (011) 2680 1811/12/13 
ISENBERG
www.isenbergfaucets.com 
ISHATVAM
348 D, MG RoadSultanpur, New Delhi – 110030Call: (011) 2680 4344 
JUST FOR DÉCOR
www.justfordecor.com 
K-LITE
D-10, A.I.E, Chennai – 600 058Call: (044) 2625 7710 
KAJARIA
J1/B1 ExtensionMohan Co-op Industrial EstateOpposite Badarpur  Thermal Power Station,  Mathura Road, New Delhi 110044 www.kajariaceramics.com
KAMDHENU PAINTS  
www.colourdreamz.com
KAMALA GALLERY
Kamala Gallery 1Rajiv Gandhi Handicrafts BhawanBaba Kharak Singh MargNew Delhi- 110001 
KANSAI NEROLAC PAINTS LTD.
Ganpatrao Kadam MargLower Parel, Mumbai 400 013 www.nerolac.com
KAPOOR LIGHT LIFE STYLE
DelhiA-66, wOkhla Phase-2, New Delhi 110020MumbaiLinking Road, 493, Bandra (W), RK Patkar Rd, Khar West, Mumbai - 400050 KARCHER
Karcher Cleaning Systems Private Limited, D-120, Sector-63 Noida - 201307Call: (0120) 7111800 
KAVITA SINGH INTERIORS
36 Turner Road, Bandra West, Mumbai 400 050. Call: (022) 26443333/4 
KIAANA
www.kiaana.com/india 
KOHLER
www.kohler.co.in 
LA SOROGEEKA
306, 2nd Floor, DLF Emporio,Vasant Kunj, New Delhi 
LIVING IN STYLE
325,259, Motilal NagarGoregaon New Link RoadMotilal Nagar, Bangur NagarMumbai 400104Call: (022) 28773448 
LUMINOUS
www.livpurewater.com 
LUXAIRE
www.luxaire.in 
MAISHAA
www.maishaa.com 
MASPAR
www.maspar.com 
MIHAUS
www.mihaus.in 
MIELE
www.miele.in 
MOTHER EARTH
Gallery No.8, Rajiv Gandhi  Handicrafts BhavanState Emporia ComplexBaba Kharag Singh Marg Connaught Place, New DelhiCall: (011) 23368397 MUKUL GOYAL
www.mukulgoyal.com 
MY TAILOR HOME
Unit No.16/ 2nd FloorEvergreen Industrial EstateShakti Mill LaneMahalaxmi Mumbai – 400011Call:(022)40043458 
NATURE NURTURER
www.naturenurturer.com 
NIVASA
27 Meher Chand Market, Jorbagh, New Delhi 110003Call: (011) 49050421http:/ /nivasa.com/ 
NITCO
www.nitco.in 
OBSESSIONS
www.obsessions.co.in 
OBSESSIONS XCLUSIF 
Shop No. 10-11, The Gallery On M.G.13 M.G. Road, New Delhi 110030 Call: (011) 41078083
ONE AVIGHNA PARK
Lower Parel, Mumbai 400 012 Tel: +91 22 6115 6060info@OneAvighnaPark.com 
ONE & ONLY LEGENDARY 
FURNITURE 
717 Conclave, Kherki Daula
Next to Haldiram, NH-8, Gurgaon - 122001
OSIM
www.osim.com 
PALLATE
Ground Floor, Haji Moosa Patrawala  Industrial Estate, Famous Studio Lane, Dr E Moses Road, Mahalaxmi, Mumbai - 400011
PARRYWARE
www.parryware.in The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  143  Store Map
PEEK-A-BOO PATTERNS
16 KasturiRangan Road,
Alwerpet, JJ Rd, Teynampet, Chennai, Tamil Nadu 600018Call: (044) 24992365
PEPPERFRY.COM
www.pepperfry.com 
PERGO
M-13,1st Floor, M Block Market  Greater Kailash Part2Delhi 110048Call: (01) 32586486
 
PETRICOR FRAGRANCES
www.petricorfragrances.com 
PHOENIX MILLS LTD.
www.thephoenixmills.com
PIANCA 
Available at Grandeur Interiors 19, Raghuvanshi MillsLower Parel, Mumbai – 400013 
PORTICO NEW YORK  
www.porticoindia.com 
PREMIUM POOLS
414, Jop PlazaNoida, Sector 18Pocket G, Uttar Pradesh 201301Call: (0120) 305 2414 www,premiumpools.org 
PINAKIN
Raghuvanshi Mills CompoundSenapati Bapat Marg, Lower Parel, Mumbai 400013
PLUSH PLAZA
www.plushplaza.com
QUEO EMPORIO
SCO 301-302, 1st ﬂoorLeisure Valley Rd, Sector 29Gurgaon, Haryana 122001 
RANDOM IN TANDEM
Adie Mansion, ground ﬂrLane of Super CinemaGrant road (E), Mumbaiwww..randomintandem.com RAVISSANT
www.ravissant.in
RED BLUE & YELLOW
G -11, Laxmi Woolen Estate,Off Dr. E Moses Road,Mahalaxmi, Mumbai-400 011www.redblueyellow.in 
ROTI KAPDA MAKAAN 
Reproscan Second FloorRaghuvanshi Mills 11/12 Senapati Bapat Marg Lower Parel, MumbaiCall: (022) 2496 5527 
ROCHE BOBOIS
Tower - 1, Indiabulls Finance Centre S.B. Marg, Elphinstone Road (W)Mumbai – 400013Call: (022) 6106 2233 
ROCA 
www.roca.in
ROLF BENZ
www.rolf-benz.com
R HOUSE
110 Dr. E Moses RoadWorli, Mumbai 400018www.rhouse.in
RA LIFESTYLE
1, Clover Cascade, Lane No. 13, Opposite Joggers Park,Kalyani Nagar,  Pune 411006 
ROOM THERAPY
Road no.45, Jubilee Hills Hyderabad  500033Call: (040) 6444 2200 
RUMORS 
www.rumorsindia.in
SAJAVAT GROUP 
8, N Block MarketGreater Kailash - INew Delhi
SARITA HANDA 
356-357, Second FloorSultanpu, MG RoadNew Delhi
The Ideal Home and Garden December 2014  |  145  Store Map
SEASONS FURNISHINGS LTD.
Jasmine Villa, 
1 Pali Naka, BR Ambedkar Rd, Pali Village,  Bandra West, Mumbai-400050
SERENITY - BLISSFUL LIVING 
Clamar Building, Opposite Guru Nanak ParkJunction of 16th & 29th RoadBandra(W)  MumbaiIndia- 400050Call: (022)26405258
SHADES OF INDIA
127, Meharchand marketLodhi Road, New Delhi  
SHOPULI.COM 
www.shopuli.com
SIDDHARTHA BY MKC
Available at:MEGAMODE INTERNATIONAL456 - 457, Udyog Vihar Phase III(Near Oberoi Trident Hotel)Gurgaon - 122 016Call: (0124) 4005293. 
SIMPOLO VITRIFIED 
PVT. LTD. 
Old Ghuntu Road, 
MORBI - 363 642,Gujarat, INDIA. Call: (02822) 242122,  241622, 243622
SIX INCH BY C. 
BHOGILAL & CO.
C. Bhogilal & Co.,Fort, 
310, Perin Nariman StreetFort, Mumbai 
SNOOZER BEDDING LTD.
C-112, Industrial AreaPhase – 7, Mohali – 160055 www.snoozerbedding.com
SOMANY GLOBAL LTD 
M - 41/ 2, Speed Bird HouseConnaught Circus, Connaught PlaceNew Delhi 110001 SONEAR
Sonear Studio, Kirti Nagar, New Delhi,Call- (011) 45086378 
SPACIO
www.spaciocollections.com 
SPACE DESIGN COLLECTIVE
www.spacedesigncollective.com 
SPACES HOME AND BEYOND
Available at Home Centre 
SURPRISE HOME LINEN 
7, Ratnavali, 1st Gauthan laneSantacruz (West)Mumbai – 54Call: (022)26493123
SQUARE FOOT
Raghuvanshi Mills CompoundLower Parel, Mumbai 
STAR CJ
www.starcj.com 
STEELCASE
www.steelcase.com 
STARWOOD HOTELS 
& RESORTS
www.starwoodhotels.com 
STONEARTS D.
31/35 Nanjappa Layout
Adugodi, Bengaluru 560030Call: +91 8022101010www.stonearts.com 
STUDIO CREO
E-52,  New ManglapuriMandi Road, Mehrauli, New Delhiwww.studiocreo.com
TADPOLE STORE
www.tadpolestore.com  
TANGERINE HOME COUTURE
Available at Home Town  THE BOMBAY STORE
Western India HouseSir PM Road, Fort,  Mumbai – 400001Call:(022)40669999
THE CHARCOAL PROJECT 
New chandra,  Veera Desai Rd, Azad Nagar,  Andheri West, Mumbai
THE DELHI DESIGN STORE
D40/792, Sau Phoota RoadChattarpur Hills, Chattarpur, New Delhi
THE FURNITURE REPUBLIC 
Opp. Metro Pillar no. 128Ghitorni, MG Road, New Delhi
THE HOME OF THE 
TRAVELER
K.no. 368-369, 
Sultanpur, Mg Road, New Delhi -110030
THE LITTLE DOOR
Shree Siddhivinayak PlazaPlot B 31, Off New Link RoadVeera Desai Industrial EstateAndheri West, Mumbai 400 053 
THE VEDIC COLLECTION
A-1, 1st ﬂoorSanik FarmsCarriapa Marg,  New Delhi www.vedic-collection.com 
THINKCUTIEFUL.COM
www.thinkcutieful.com
THE WHITE WINDOW
330 Palatial Building, Ground Floor21 Ambedkar Building, Bandra (W)Call: (022) 26465957 
THE GREAT EASTERN HOME
The New Great Eastern Spg. & Wvg. Co.Ltd. 25 – 29,  Dr. Ambedkar RoadByculla,  Mumbai - 400 027 TISVA
www.lifebytisva.com 
TOM DIXON
www.tomdixon.net 
TONINO LAMBORGHINI CASA
Available at Ace Maison, Experience CenterU-4956, Hyatt RegencyBhikaji Cama Place, Ring Road,  New Delhi 110066Call: 9999966702www.acemaison.com
TRACIESTIERJOHNSON.COM
www.traciestierjohnson.com 
TRANCEFORME
36, Laxmi Mills EstateShakti Mills LaneOff Dr. E. Moses Road,Mahalaxmi,Mumbai – 400 011 
VILLEROY & BOCH
G-10A, Palladium AnnexePhoenix Mills Compound462, Senapati Bapat MargLower Parel, Mumbai 400 013Call: (022) 4004 0014 
VISIONNAIRE 
www.visionnaire-home.com
VITRA
www.vitra.com
VERSACE TILES BOUTIQUE
Rajiv SanitationM-45, M Block MarketGreater KailashPart 2, New Delhi 
WESTSIDE
(available at)The Forum MallGround Floor & 1st FloorHosur Main Road21, KoramangalaBangalore- 560095 
WORKSHOPQ
www.workshopq.comAhmedabad I Baroda I Bangalore I Chennai  I Hyderabad I Kolkata I Mumbai I Noida I Panchkula  I Cochin 
Karcher Cleaning System Pvt. Ltd.
Head Office: D-120, Sector 63, Noida - 201301, U.P. India.Ph: +91-120-7111800 I Fax: +91-120-7111900 I e-mail: home.garden@karcher.inToll Free Number :1800 1234 180    Follow us
/karcher.india.33 /Karcher
The Home & Garden cleaning equipment range covers 
primarily smaller products than the Professional sector.Home & Garden offers basically cleaning equipment forcleanliness in and around the house. In this segment you’ll find the well-known yellow Kärcher products. 
Window Vacuum
RNI NO.  MAHENG/2006/22330